------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

Chapter 1: Historical Background

    The Britishers came to India in 1608 as
    traders, in the form of the East India
    Company, which had the exclusive
    right of trading in India under a charter
    granted by Queen Elizabeth I in 1600. In
    1765, the Company, which till then had
    purely trading functions, obtained the
    ‘diwani’ (i.¢., rights over revenue and civil
    justice) of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa(The Mughal 
    Emperor, Shah Alam, granted ‘Diwani’
    to the Company after its victory in the Battle of
    Buxar (1764)). This
    started its career as a territorial power. In
    1858, in the wake of the ‘sepoy mutiny’, the
    British Crown assumed direct responsibil-
    ity for the governance of India. This rule
    continued until India was granted indepen-
    dence on August 15, 1947.

    With Independence came the need for a
    Constitution. Hence, a Constituent Assembly
    was formed for this purpose in 1946 and on
    January 26, 1950, the Constitution came into
    being. However, various features of the Indian
    Constitution and polity have their roots in
    the British rule. There were certain events
    in the British rule that laid down the legal
    framework for the organisation and func-
    tioning of government and administration
    in British India. These events have greatly
    influenced our constitution and polity. They
    are explained here in a chronological order
    under two major headings:
        1. The Company Rule (1773-1858)
        2. The Crown Rule (1858-1947)

    THE COMPANY RULE (1773-1858)

        Regulating Act of 1773

            This act was of great constitutional impor-
            tance as (a) it was the first step taken by the
            British Government to control and regulate
            the affairs of the East India Company in
            India; (b) it recognised, for the first time, the
            political and administrative functions of the
            Company; and (c) it laid the foundations of
            central administration in India.

            The features of this Act were as follows:

                1. It designated the Governor of Bengal as the
                ‘Governor-General of Bengal’ and created
                an Executive Council of four members
                to assist him. The first such Governor-
                General was Lord Warren Hastings.

                2. It made the Governors of Bombay and
                Madras presidencies subordinate to the
                Governor-General of Bengal, unlike
                earlier, when the three presidencies
                were independent of one another.

                3. It provided for the establishment of a
                Supreme Court at Calcutta (1774) com-
                prising one chief justice and three other
                judges.

                4. It prohibited the servants of the Company
                from engaging in any private trade
                oraccepting presents or bribes from the
                ‘natives’.

                5. It strengthened the control of the British
                Government over the Company by
                requiring the Court of Directors (gov-
                erning body of the Company) toreport
                on its revenue, civil, and military affairs
                in India.

        Amending Act of 1781

            In a bid to rectify the defects of the Regulat-
            ing Act of 1773, the British Parliament passed
            the Amending Act of 1781, also known as the
            Act of Settlement.

            The features of this Act were as follows:

                1. It exempted the Governor-General and
                the Council from the jurisdiction of
                the Supreme Court for the acts carried
                out by them in their official capacity.
                Similarly, it also exempted the servants
                of the Company from the jurisdiction
                of the Supreme Court for their official
                actions.

                2. It excluded the revenue matters and the
                matters arising in the collection of
                revenue from the jurisdiction of the
                Supreme Court.

                3. It provided that the Supreme Court was
                to have jurisdiction over all the inhab-
                itants of Calcutta. It also required the
                Court to administer the personal law of
                the defendants i.e., Hindus were to be
                tried according to the Hindu law and
                Muslims were to be tried according to
                the Mohammedan law.

                4, It laid down that the appeals from the
                Provincial Courts could be taken to the
                Governor-General-in-Council and not to
                the Supreme Court.

                5. It empowered the Governor-General-in-
                Council to frame regulations for the
                Provincial Courts and Councils.

        Pitt’s India Act of 1784

            The next important act was the Pitt's India
            Act” of 1784. It was introduced in the British 
            Parliament by the then Prime Minister, William Pitt.

            The features of this Act were as follows:
                1. It distinguished between the commercial
                and political functions of the Company.
                2. It allowed the Court of Directors to man-
                age the commercial affairs, but created a
                new body called the Board of Control to
                manage the political affairs. Thus, it estab-
                lished a system of double government.
                3. It empowered the Board of Control to
                supervise and direct all operations of
                the civil and military government or rev-
                enues of the British possessions in India.

            Thus, the act was significant for two reasons:
            first, the Company's territories in India were
            for the first time called the ‘British possessions
            in India’; and second, the British Govern-
            ment was given the supreme control over Com-
            pany's affairs and its administration in India.

        Act of 1786

            In 1786, Lord Cornwallis was appointed as the
            Governor-General of Bengal. He placed two
            demands to accept that post, viz.,
                1. He should be given power to override the
                decision of his council in special cases.
                2. He would also be the Commander-in-Chief.
                Accordingly, the Act of 1786 was enacted to
                make both the provisions.

        Charter Act of 1793

            The features of this Act were as follows:

                1. It extended the overriding power given to
                Lord Cornwallis over his council, to all
                future Governor-Generals and Governors
                of Presidencies.

                2. It gave the Governor-General more powers
                and control over the governments of the
                subordinate Presidencies of Bombay and
                Madras.

                3. It extended the trade monopoly of the
                Company in India for a period of
                another twenty years.

                4 It provided that the Commander-in-Chief
                was not to be a member of the Governor-
                General’s council, unless he was so
                appointed.

                5. It laid down that the members of the
                Board of Control and their staff were,
                henceforth, to be paid out of the Indian
                revenues.


        Charter Act of 1813

            The features of this Act were as follows:

                1. It abolished the trade monopoly of the
                Company in India i.e., the Indian
                trade was thrown open to all British
                merchants. However, it continued the
                monopoly of the Company over trade
                in tea and trade with China.

                2. It asserted the sovereignty of the British
                Crown over the Company's territories in
                India.

                3. It allowed the Christian missionaries to
                come to India for the purpose of enlight-
                ening the people.

                4. It provided for the spread of western
                education among the inhabitants of the
                British territories in India.

                5. It authorised the Local Governments in
                India to impose taxes on persons. They
                could also punish the persons for not
                paying taxes.

        Charter Act of 1833

            This Act was the final step towards centralisa-
            tion in British India.

            The features of this Act were as follows:

                1. It made the Governor-General of Bengal
                as the Governor-General of India and
                vested in him all civil and military
                powers. Thus, the act vested, for the
                first time, the Government of India with
                authority over the entire territorial area
                possessed by the British in India. Lord
                William Bentick was the first Governor-
                General of India.

                2. It deprived the Governor of Bombay and
                Madras of their legislative powers. The
                Governor-General of India was given
                exclusive legislative powers for the
                entirety of British India. The laws made
                under the previous acts were called as
                Regulations, while laws made under this
                act were called as Acts.

                3. It ended the activities of the East India
                Company as a commercial body, which
                became a purely administrative body. It
                provided that the Company's territories
                in India were held by it ‘in trust for His
                Majesty, His heirs and successors’.

                4. The Charter Act of 1833 attempted to
                introduce a system of open competi-
                tion for selection of civil servants and
                stated that the Indians should not be
                debarred from holding any place, office
                and employment under the Company.
                However, this provision was negated after
                opposition from the Court of Directors.

        Charter Act of 1853

            This was the last of the series of Charter Acts
            passed by the British Parliament between
            1793 and 1853. It was a significant constitu-
            tional landmark.

            The features of this Act were as follows:

                1. It separated, for the first time, the leg-
                islative and executive functions of the
                Governor-General’s council. It provided
                for the addition of six new members
                called legislative councillors to the
                council. In other words, it established a
                separate Governor-General’s legislative
                council which came to be known as the
                Indian (Central) Legislative Council.
                This legislative wing of the council
                functioned as a mini-Parliament, adopt-
                ing the same procedures as the British
                Parliament. Thus, legislation, for the
                first time, was treated as a special
                function of the government, requiring
                special machinery and special process.

                2. It introduced an open competition system
                of selection and recruitment of civil ser-
                vants. The covenanted civil service(At that time, 
                the Civil Services of the company were
                classified into covenanted civil services (higher
                civil services) and uncovenanted civil services
                (lower civil services). The former was created by
                a law of the Company, while the later was created
                otherwise.) was,
                thus, thrown open to the Indians also.
                Accordingly, the Macaulay Committee
                (the Committee on the Indian Civil
                Service) was appointed in 1854.

                3. It extended the Company's rule and
                allowed it to retain the possession of
                Indian territories on trust for the British
                Crown. But, it did not specify any
                particular period, unlike the previous
                Charters. This was a clear indication
                that the Company’s rule could be termi-
                nated at any time the Parliament liked.

                4. It introduced, for the first time, local
                representation in the Indian (Central)
                Legislative Council. Of the six new legis-
                lative members of the Governor-General’s
                council, four members were appointed
                by the local (provincial) governments of
                Madras, Bombay, Bengal and Agra.

    € THE CROWN RULE (1858-1947)

        Government of India Act of 1858

            This significant Act was enacted in the wake
            of the Revolt of 1857—also known as the First
            War of Independence or the ‘sepoy mutiny’.
            The act known as the Act for the Good Gov-
            ernment of India, abolished the East India
            Company, and transferred the powers of
            Government, territories and revenues to the
            British Crown.

            The features of this Act were as follows:
                1. It provided that India, henceforth, was
                to be governed by, and in the name of,
                Her Majesty. It changed the designation
                of the Governor-General of India to that
                of Viceroy of India. He (Viceroy) was
                the direct representative of the British
                Crown in India. Lord Canning, thus,
                became the first Viceroy of India.

                2. It ended the system of double Government
                by abolishing the Board of Control and
                Court of Directors.

                3. It created a new office, Secretary of State
                for India, vested with complete authority
                and control over Indian administration.
                The secretary of state was a member of
                the British Cabinet and was responsible
                ultimately to the British Parliament.

                4, It established a 15-member council of
                India to assist the Secretary of State
                for India. The council was an advisory
                body. The secretary of state was made
                the Chairman of the council.

                5. It constituted the Secretary of State-in-
                Council as a body corporate, capable of
                suing and being sued in India and in
                England.

            “The Act of 1858 was, however, largely
            confined to the improvement of the admin-
            istrative machinery by which the Indian Gov-
            ernment was to be supervised and controlled
            in England. It did not alter in any substantial
            way the system of Government that prevailed
            in India”.
                - Subhash C. Kashyap, Our Constitution, National
                Book Trust, Third Edition, 2001, p. 14.

        Indian Councils Act of 1861

            After the great revolt of 1857, the British
            Government felt the necessity of seeking
            cooperation of the Indians in the adminis-
            tration of their country. In pursuance of this
            policy of association, three acts were enacted
            by the British Parliament in 1861, 1892 and
            1909. The Indian Councils Act of 1861 is an
            important landmark in the constitutional and
            political history of India.

            The features of this Act were as follows:
                1. It made a beginning of the representative
                institutions by associating Indians with
                the law-making process. It, thus, pro-
                vided that the Viceroy should nominate
                some Indians as non-official members
                of his expanded council. In 1862, Lord
                Canning, the then Viceroy, nominated
                three Indians to his legislative council—
                the Raja of Benaras, the Maharaja of
                Patiala and Sir Dinkar Rao.

                2. It initiated the process of decentralisation
                by restoring the legislative powers to the
                Bombay and Madras Presidencies. It,
                thus, reversed the centralising tendency
                that started from the Regulating Act of
                1773 and reached its climax under the
                Charter Act of 1833. This policy of leg-
                islative devolution resulted in the grant
                of almost complete internal autonomy
                to the provinces in 1937,

                3. It also provided for the establishment
                of new legislative councils for Bengal,
                North-Western Provinces and Punjab,
                which were established in 1862, 1886
                and 1897, respectively.

                4. It empowered the Viceroy to make rules
                and orders for the more convenient
                transaction of business in the council. It
                also gave a recognition to the ‘portfolio’
                system, introduced by Lord Canning in
                1859. Under this, a member of the vice-
                roy’s council was made in-charge of one
                or more departments of the Government
                and was authorised to issue final orders
                on behalf of the council on matters of
                his department(s).

                5. It empowered the Viceroy to issue ordi-
                nances, without the concurrence of the
                legislative council, during an emer-
                gency. The life of such an ordinance was
                six months.

        Indian Councils Act of 1892

            The features of this Act were as follows:

                1. It increased the number of additional
                (non-official) members in the Central
                and provincial legislative councils, but
                maintained the official majority in them.

                2, It increased the functions of legislative
                councils and gave them the power of
                discussing the budget(The system of Budget 
                was introduced in British
                India in 1860.) and addressing
                questions to the executive.

                3. It provided for the nomination of some
                non-official members of the (a) Central
                Legislative Council by the Viceroy on
                the recommendation of the provincial
                legislative councils and the Bengal
                Chamber of Commerce, and (b) that of
                the provincial legislative councils by the
                Governors on the recommendation of
                the district boards, municipalities, uni-
                versities, trade associations, zamindars
                and chambers.

            “The act made a limited and indirect provi-
            sion for the use of election in filling up some
            of the non-official seats both in the Central
            and provincial legislative councils. The word
            election was, however, not used in the Act. The
            process was described as nomination made on
            the recommendation of certain bodies”.
                - V. N. Shukla, The Constitution of India, Eastern Book
                Company, Tenth Edition, 2001, p. A-10.

        Indian Councils Act of 1909

            This Act is also known as Morley-Minto
            Reforms (Lord Morley was the then Secretary
            of State for India and Lord Minto was the then
            Viceroy of India).

            The features of this Act were as follows:

                1. It considerably increased the size of the
                legislative councils, both Central and
                Provincial. The number of members in
                the Central legislative council was raised
                from 16 to 60. The number of members
                in the provincial legislative councils was
                not uniform.

                2. It retained official majority in the Central
                legislative council, but allowed the pro-
                vincial legislative councils to have non-
                official majority.

                3. It enlarged the deliberative functions of
                the legislative councils at both levels. For
                example, members were allowed to ask
                supplementary questions, move resolu-
                tions on the budget and so on.

                4. It provided (for the first time) for the
                association of Indians with the executive
                councils of the viceroy and Governors.
                Satyendra Prasad Sinha became the
                first Indian to join the viceroy's execu-
                tive council. He was appointed as the
                Law Member.

                5. It introduced a system of communal
                representation for Muslims by accept-
                ing the concept of ‘separate electorate’.
                Under this, the Muslim members were to
                be elected only by Muslim voters. Thus,
                the Act ‘legalised communalism’ and
                Lord Minto came to be known as the
                Father of Communal Electorate.

                G. It also provided for the separate repre-
                sentation of presidency corporations,
                chambers of commerce, universities and
                zamindars.

        Government of India Act of 1919

            On August 20, 1917, the British Government
            declared, for the first time, that its objective
            was the gradual introduction of responsible
            Government in India.
                The declaration thus stated: ‘The policy of His
                Majesty's Government is that of the increasing
                association of Indians in every branch of the
                administration, and the gradual development of
                self-government institutions, with a view to the
                progressive realisation of responsible government
                in India as an integral part of the British Empire’.

            The Government of India Act of 1919 was
            thus enacted, which came into force in 1921.
            This Act is also known as Montagu-Chelms-
            ford Reforms (Montagu was the Secretary of
            State for India and Lord Chelmsford was the
            Viceroy of India).

            The features of this Act were as follows:

                1. It provided for the classification of all
                the subjects of administration into two
                categories, namely, the central subjects
                and the provincial subjects. This clas-
                sification was done by the “Devolution
                Rules” framed under the Act. These rules
                facilitated the delegation of authority
                from the centre to the provinces. In this
                way, the Act relaxed the central control
                over the provinces. The central and
                provincial legislatures were authorised
                to make laws on their respective list of
                subjects. However, the structure of gov-
                ernment continued to be centralised and
                unitary.

                2. It further divided the provincial subjects
                into two parts—transferred and reserved.
                The transferred subjects included public
                health, education, local self-government,
                agriculture etc. while the reserved sub-
                jects included police, administration of
                justice, prisons, land revenue, finance
                etc. The transferred subjects were to be
                administered by the Governor with the
                aid of Ministers responsible to the leg-
                islative council. The reserved subjects,
                on the other hand, were to be adminis-
                tered by the Governor and his executive
                council without being responsible to the
                legislative council. This dual scheme of
                governance was known as ‘dyarchy'’—a
                term derived from the Greek word di-arche
                which means double rule. However, this
                experiment was largely unsuccessful.

                3. It introduced, for the first time, bicamer-
                alism and direct elections in the coun-
                try. Thus, the Indian legislative council
                was replaced by a bicameral legislature
                consisting of an Upper House (Council
                of State) and a Lower House (Legislative
                Assembly). The majority of members of
                both the Houses were chosen by direct
                election.

                4. It required that the three of the six mem-
                bers of the Viceroy’s executive Council
                (other than the Commander-in-Chief)
                were to be Indian.

                5. It extended the principle of communal
                representation by providing separate
                electorates for Sikhs, Indian Christians,
                Anglo-Indians and Europeans.

                6. It granted franchise to a limited number
                of people on the basis of property, tax
                or other qualifications.

                7. It created a new office of the High
                Commissioner for India in London and
                transferred to him some of the functions
                hitherto performed by the Secretary of
                State for India.

                8. It provided for the establishment of a pub-
                lic service commission. Hence, a Central
                Public Service Commission was set up in
                1926 for recruiting civil servants.
                    - This was done on the recommendation of the Lee
                    Commission on Superior Civil Services in India
                    (1923-24).

                9. It separated, for the first time, provincial
                budgets from the Central budget and
                authorised the provincial legislatures to
                enact their budgets.

                10. It provided for the appointment of a statu-
                tory commission to inquire into and
                report on its working after ten years of
                its coming into force.

                ll. It proposed the establishment of a
                Chamber of Princes (also known as
                Narendra Mandal). The chamber was
                inagurated in 1921. It consisted of
                120 members i.e., Princes of 108 states
                and 12 representatives of other states. It
                was headed by the Viceroy (Governor-
                General). It facilitated the consultation
                and discussion on the matters of com-
                mon interest.

            Simon Commission 
                In November 1927 (i.e.,
                2 years before the schedule), the British
                Government announced the appointment
                of a seven-member statutory commission
                under the chairmanship of Sir John Simon
                to report on the condition of India under
                its new Constitution. All the members of
                the commission were British and hence, all
                the parties boycotted the commission. The
                commission submitted its report in 1930
                and recommended the abolition of dyarchy,
                extension of responsible Government in the
                provinces, establishment of a federation of
                British India and princely states, continua-
                tion of communal electorate and so on. To
                consider the proposals of the commission,
                the British Government convened three round
                table conferences of the representatives of
                the British Government, British India and
                Indian princely states. On the basis of these
                discussions, a ‘White Paper on Consitutional
                Reforms’ was prepared and submitted for the
                consideration of the Joint Select Committee
                of the British Parliament. The recommen-
                dations of this committee were incorpo-
                rated (with certain changes) in the next
                Government of India Act of 1935.

            Communal Award 
                In August 1932, Ramsay
                MacDonald, the British Prime Minister,
                announced a scheme of representation of
                the minorities, which came to be known
                as the Communal Award. The award not
                only continued separate electorates for the
                Muslims, Sikhs, Indian Christians, Anglo-
                Indians and Europeans but also extended it
                to the depressed classes (Scheduled Castes).
                Gandhiji was distressed over this extension
                of the principle of communal representation
                to the depressed classes and undertook a
                fast unto death in Yerawada Jail (Poona) to
                get the award modified. At last, there was
                an agreement between the Congress and
                Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the leader of the depressed
                classes. The agreement, known as the Poona
                Pact, retained the Hindu joint electorate and
                gave reserved seats to the depressed classes.

                The British Government accepted the
                Poona Pact and modified the Communal
                Award in respect to the depressed classes
                (Scheduled Castes). This means that the provi-
                sions of separate electorates for the depressed
                classes were dropped from the scheme of
                representation contained in the Communal
                Award. Subsequently, the provisions of the
                Poona Pact were incorporated in the next
                Government of India Act of 1935. In other
                words, the composition of the central and
                provincial legislatures under the 1935 Act was
                based on this modified Communal Award.

        Government of India Act of 1935

            The Act marked a second milestone towards a
            completely responsible government in India.
            It was a lengthy and detailed document hav-
            ing 321 Sections and 10 Schedules.

            The features of this Act were as follows:
                1. It provided for the establishment of an All-
                India Federation consisting of provinces
                and princely states as units. The Act
                divided the powers between the Centre
                and units in terms of three lists—Federal
                List (for Centre, with 59 items), Provincial
                List (for provinces, with 54 items) and
                the Concurrent List (for both, with 36
                items). Residuary powers were given to
                the Viceroy (Governor-General). However,
                the federation never came into being
                as the princely states did not join it.

                2. It abolished dyarchy in the provinces and
                introduced ‘provincial autonomy’ in its
                place. The provinces were allowed to act
                as autonomous units of administration
                in their defined spheres. Moreover, the
                Act introduced responsible Governments
                in provinces, that is, the Governor was
                required to act with the advice of min-
                isters responsible to the provincial leg-
                islature. This came into effect in 1937
                and was discontinued in 1939.

                3. It provided for the adoption of dyarchy
                at the Centre. Consequently, the federal
                subjects were divided into reserved sub-
                jects and transferred subjects. However,
                this provision of the Act did not come
                into operation at all.

                4. It introduced bicameralism in six out
                of eleven provinces. Thus, the legisla-
                tures of Bengal, Bombay, Madras, Bihar,
                Assam and the United Provinces were
                made bicameral consisting of a legisla-
                tive council (upper house) and a legisla-
                tive assembly (lower house). However,
                many restrictions were placed on them.

                5. It reserved a certain number of gen-
                eral seats for the depressed classes
                (Scheduled Castes). It also extended the
                special representation to women and
                labour (workers).

                6. It abolished the Council of India, estab-
                lished by the Government of India Act
                of 1858. The secretary of state for India
                was provided with a team of advisors.

                7. It extended franchise. About 14 per cent of
                the total population got the voting right.

                8. It provided for the establishment of a
                Reserve Bank of India to control the
                currency and credit of the country.

                9. It provided for the establishment of
                not only a Federal Public Service
                Commission, but also a Provincial
                Public Service Commission and Joint
                Public Service Commission for two or
                more provinces.

                10. It provided for the establishment of a
                Federal Court, which was set up in 1937.

                11. Itseparated Burma (now Myanmar) from
                India.

                12. It created two new provinces of Orissa and
                Sind.

                13. It provided for safeguards to protect the
                interests of minorities.

                14, It provided for the establishment of a
                Federal Railway Authority to look after
                the administration of railways.

                15. It provided for the appointment of an
                Auditor-General of India to audit the
                accounts of the federation and the
                provinces.

        Indian Independence Act of 1947

            On February 20, 1947, the British Prime Min-
            ister Clement Atlee declared that the British
            rule in India would end by June 30, 1948;
            after which the power would be transferred
            to responsible Indian hands. This announce-
            ment was followed by the agitation by the
            Muslim League demanding partition of the
            country. Again on June 3, 1947, the British
            Government made it clear that any Consti-
            tution framed by the Constituent Assembly
            of India (formed in 1946) cannot apply to
            those parts of the country which were unwill-
            ing to accept it. On the same day (June 3,
            1947), Lord Mountbatten, the Viceroy of
            India, put forth the partition plan, known
            as the Mountbatten Plan. The plan was
            accepted by the Congress and the Muslim
            League. Immediate effect was given to the
            plan by enacting the Indian Independence
            Act (1947).

            The Indian Independence Bill was introduced in
            the British Parliament on July 4, 1947 and received
            the Royal Assent on July 18, 1947. The act came
            into force on August 15, 1947.


            The features of this Act were as follows:

                1. It ended the British rule in India and
                declared India as an independent and
                sovereign state from August 15, 1947.

                2. It provided for the partition of India
                and creation of two independent
                dominions of India and Pakistan with
                the right to secede from the British
                Commonwealth.

                3. It abolished the office of Viceroy and
                provided, for each dominion, a Governor-
                General, who was to be appointed by the
                British King on the advice of the domin-
                ion cabinet. His Majesty’s Government
                in Britain was to have no responsibility
                with respect to the Government of India
                or Pakistan.

                4, It empowered the Constituent Assemblies
                of the two dominions to frame and
                adopt any constitution for their respec-
                tive nations and to repeal any act of
                the British Parliament, including the
                Independence act itself,

                5. It empowered the Constituent Assemblies
                of both the dominions to legislate for
                their respective territories till the new
                constitutions were drafted and enforced.
                No Act of the British Parliament passed
                after August 15, 1947 was to extend to
                either of the new dominions unless it
                was extended thereto by a law of the
                legislature of the dominion.

                6. It abolished the office of the Secretary
                of State for India and transferred his
                functions to the Secretary of State for
                Commonwealth Affairs.

                7. It proclaimed the lapse of British para-
                mountcy over the Indian princely states
                and treaty relations with tribal areas
                from August 15, 1947.

                8. It granted freedom to the Indian princely
                states either to join the Dominion of
                India or Dominion of Pakistan or to
                remain independent.

                9. It provided for the governance of each of
                the dominions and the provinces by the
                Government of India Act of 1935, till
                the new Constitutions were framed. The
                dominions were, however, authorised to
                make modifications in the Act.

                10. It deprived the British Monarch of his
                right to veto bills or ask for reservation
                of certain bills for his approval. But,
                this right was reserved for the Governor-
                General. The Governor-General would
                have full power to assent to any bill in
                the name of His Majesty.

                11. It designated the Governor-General of
                India and the provincial governors as
                constitutional (nominal) heads of the
                states. They were made to act on the
                advice of the respective council of min-
                isters in all matters.

                12. It dropped the title of Emperor of India
                from the royal titles of the King of
                England.

                13. It discontinued the appointment to civil
                services and reservation of posts by
                the secretary of state for India. The
                members of the civil services appointed
                before August 15, 1947 would continue to
                enjoy all benefits that they were entitled
                to till that time.

            At the stroke of midnight of 14-15 August,
            1947, the British rule came to an end and
            power was transferred to the two new inde-
            pendent Dominions of India and Pakistan.
            Lord Mountbatten became the first Gover-
            nor-General of the new Dominion of India.
            He swore in Jawaharlal Nehru as the first
            Prime Minister of independent India. The
            Constituent Assembly of India formed in
            1946 became the Parliament of the Indian
            Dominion.
                The boundaries between the two Dominions were
                determined by a Boundary Commission headed
                by Radcliff. Pakistan included the provinces of
                West Punjab, Sind, Baluchistan, East Bengal,
                North-Western Frontier Province and the district
                of Sylhet in Assam. The referendum in the North-
                Western Frontier Province and Sylhet was in
                favour of Pakistan.

            The members of both, the Interim Gov-
            ernment (1946) and the First Cabinet of
            Independent India (1947), are mentioned in
            Tables 1.1 and 1.2 respectively.


------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 1.1

SI. No.
as

oO NO 7 fF WN

Note: The members of the Interim Governmen

Interim Government (1946)

Members

Jawaharlal Nehru

Sardar Vallabhbhal Patel
Dr. Rajendra Prasad
Dr. John Mathal
Jagjivan Ram
Sardar Baldev Singh
C.H. Bhabha
Liaquat Ali Khan
Abdur Rab Nishtar
Asaf All

C. Rajagopalachari
L, Chundrigar
Ghaznafar Ali Khan

Jogendra Nath Mandal

Portfolios Held

Vice-President of the Council; External Affairs and
Commonwealth Relations

Home, Information and Broadcasting
Food and Agriculture
Industries and Supplies
Labour

Defence

Works, Mines and Power
Finance

Posts and Air

‘Railways and Transport
Education and Arts
Commerce

Health

Law

t were members of the Viceroy’s Executive Council. The Viceroy

continued to be the head of the Council, But, Jawaharlal Nehru was designated as the Vice-President of the Council.

------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------


------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 1.2 First Cabinet of Independent India (1947)

SI. No.
1.

Oo On Ons wi

Members

Jawaharlal Nehru

Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel
Dr. Rajendra Prasad
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad
Dr. John Mathai

R.K. Shanmugham Chetty
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar
Jagjivan Ram

Sardar Baldev Singh

Raj Kumari Amrit Kaur
C.H. Bhabha

Rafi Ahmed Kidwai

Dr, Shyama Prasad Mukherjee

V.N. Gadgil

Portfolios Held

Prime Minister; External Affairs and Commonwealth
Relations; Scientific Research

Home, Information and Broadcasting; States
Food and Agriculture
Education

Railways and Transport
Finance

Law

Labour

Defence

Health

Commerce
Communication
industries and Supplies

Works, Mines and Power
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER 2: Making of the Constitution

    DEMAND FOR A CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY

        It was in 1934 that the idea of a Constituent
        Assembly for India was put forward for the
        first time by M.N. Roy, a pioneer of the com-
        munist movement in India. In 1935, the Indian
        National Congress (INC), for the first time,
        officially demanded a Constituent Assembly to
        frame the Constitution of India. In 1938, Jawa-
        harlal Nehru, on behalf of the INC declared that
        ‘the Constitution of free India must be framed,
        without outside interference, by a Constituent
        Assembly elected on the basis of adult fran-
        chise’. This view was endorsed and reiterated by
        the INC by passing a resolution in 1939.

        The demand was finally accepted in prin-
        ciple by the British Government in what is
        known as the ‘August Offer’ of 1940. In 1942,
        Sir Stafford Cripps, a Member of the Cabi-
        net, came to India with a draft proposal of
        the British Government on the framing of
        an independent Constitution to be adopted
        after World War II. The Cripps Proposals
        were rejected by the Muslim League, which
        wanted India to be divided into two autono-
        mous states with two separate Constituent
        Assemblies. Finally, a Cabinet Mission (The Cabinet 
        Mission consisting of three members
        (Lord Pethick Lawrence, Sir Stafford Cripps and
        A.V. Alexander) arrived in India on March 24,
        1946. The Cabinet Mission published its plan on
        May 16, 1946.) was
        sent to India. While it rejected the idea of two
        Constituent Assemblies, it put forth a scheme
        for the Constituent Assembly which more or
        less satisfied the Muslim League.

    COMPOSITION OF THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY

        The Constituent Assembly was constituted in
        November 1946 under the scheme formulated
        by the Cabinet Mission Plan.

        The features of the scheme were:

            1. The total strength of the Constituent
            Assembly was to be 389. Of these, 296
            seats were to be allotted to British India
            and 93 seats to the princely states. Out
            of 296 seats allotted to British India,
            292 members were to be drawn from the
            eleven governors’ provinces (These include 
            Madras, Bombay, UP, Bihar, Central
            Provinces, Orissa, Punjab, NWFP, Sindh, Bengal
            and Assam.) and four
            from the four Chief Commissioners’
            provinces (These include Delhi, Ajmer-Merwara, Coorg and
            British Baluchistan.), one from each.

            2. Each province and princely state (or
            group of states in case of small states)
            were to be allotted seats in proportion
            to their respective population. Roughly,
            one seat was to be allotted for every mil-
            lion population.

            3. Seats allocated to each British province
            were to be divided among the three prin-
            cipal communities—Muslims, Sikhs and
            General (all except Muslims and Sikhs),
            in proportion to their population.

            4. The representatives of each community
            were to be elected by members of that
            community in the provincial legislative
            assembly and voting was to be by the
            method of proportional representation
            by means of single transferable vote.

            5. The representatives of the princely states
            were to be nominated by the heads of the
            princely states.

        It is, thus, clear that the Constituent
        Assembly was to be a partly elected and partly
        nominated body. Moreover, the members were
        to be indirectly elected by the members of the
        provincial assemblies, who themselves were
        elected on a limited franchise.
            The Government of India Act of 1935 granted
            limited franchise on the basis of tax, property and
            other qualifications.

        The elections to the Constituent Assembly
        (for 296 seats allotted to the British Indian
        Provinces) were held in July-August 1946. The
        Indian National Congress won 208 seats, the
        Muslim League 73 seats and the small groups
        and independents got the remaining 15 seats.
        However, the 93 seats allotted to the princely
        states were not filled as they decided to stay
        away from the Constituent Assembly.

        Although the Constituent Assembly was not
        directly elected by the people of India on the
        basis of adult franchise, the Assembly comprised
        representatives of all sections of Indian society—
        Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, Parsis, Anglo-Indians,
        Indian Christians, SCs, STs including women of
        all these sections. The Assembly included all
        important personalities of India at that time,
        with the exception of Mahatma Gandhi.

        The allocation of seats in the Constituent
        Assembly, the results of the elections to the
        Constituent Assembly, the community-wise
        representation in the Constituent Assembly
        and the women members of the Constituent
        Assembly are mentioned in Tables 2.1, 22, 23
        and 2.4 respectively.


    WORKING OF THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY

        The Constituent Assembly held its first meet-
        ing on December 9, 1946. The Muslim League
        boycotted the meeting and insisted on a sepa-
        rate state of Pakistan. The meeting was, thus,
        attended by only 207 members. Dr. Sachcht-
        dananda Sinha, the oldest member, was elected
        as the temporary Chairman of the Assembly,
        following the French practice.

        On December 11, 1946, Dr. Rajendra Prasad
        was elected as the permanent Chairman
        (President) of the Assembly. Similarly, on
        January 25, 1947, H.C. Mukherjee was elected
        as the Vice-President of the Assembly. Later
        on, the Assembly resolved to have two Vice-
        Presidents. Accordingly, on July 16, 1947, V. T.
        Krishnamachari was elected as the second
        Vice-President of the Assembly.

        Objectives Resolution

            On December 13, 1946, Jawaharlal Nehru moved
            the historic ‘Objectives Resolution’ in the Assem-
            bly. It laid down the fundamentals and philoso-
            phy of the constitutional structure. It read:

                1. This Constituent Assembly declares its
                firm and solemn resolve to proclaim
                India as an Independent Sovereign
                Republic and to draw up for her future
                governance a Constitution

                2. Wherein the territories that now comprise
                British India, the territories that now
                form the Indian States and such other
                parts of India as are outside India and
                the States as well as other territories as
                are willing to be constituted into the
                independent sovereign India, shall be a
                Union of them all; and

                3. Wherein the said territories, whether
                with their present boundaries or with
                such others as may be determined by
                the Constituent Assembly and thereafter
                according to the law of the Constitution,
                shall possess and retain the status of
                autonomous units together with residu-
                ary powers and exercise all powers and
                functions of Government and adminis-
                tration save and except such powers and
                functions as are vested in or assigned to
                the Union or as are inherent or implied
                in the Union or resulting therefrom; and

                4. Wherein all power and authority of the
                sovereign independent India, its con-
                stituent parts and organs of Government
                are derived from the people; and

                5. Wherein shall be guaranteed and secured
                to all the people of India justice, social,
                economic and political; equality of sta-
                tus of opportunity, and before the law;
                freedom of thought, expression, belief,
                faith, worship, vocation, association and
                action, subject to law and public moral-
                ity; and

                6. Wherein adequate safeguards shall be
                provided for minorities, backward and
                tribal areas, and depressed and other
                backward classes; and

                7. Whereby shall be maintained the integ-
                rity of the territory of the Republic and
                its sovereign rights on land, sea and air
                according to justice and the law of civi-
                lized nations; and

                8. This ancient land attains its rightful and
                honoured place in the world and makes
                its full and willing contribution to the
                promotion of world peace and the wel-
                fare of mankind.”

            This Resolution was unanimously adopted
            by the Assembly on January 22, 1947. It
            influenced the eventual shaping of the con-
            stitution through all its subsequent stages. Its
            modified version forms the Preamble of the
            present Constitution.

        Changes by the Independence Act

            The representatives of the princely states,
            who had stayed away from the Constituent
            Assembly, gradually joined it. On April 28,
            1947, representatives of the six states(These 
            include Baroda, Bikaner, Jaipur, Patiala,
            Rewa and Udaipur.) were
            part of the Assembly. After the acceptance of
            the Mountbatten Plan of June 3, 1947, for the
            partition of the country, the representatives
            of most of the other princely states took their
            seats in the Assembly. The members of the
            Muslim League from the Indian Dominion
            also entered the Assembly.

            The Indian Independence Act of 1947 made
            the following three changes in the position of
            the Assembly:

                1. The Assembly was made a fully SOV-
                ereign body, which could frame
                any Constitution it pleased. The act
                empowered the Assembly to abrogate
                or alter any law made by the British
                Parliament in relation to India.

                2. The Assembly also became a legislative
                body. In other words, two separate func-
                tions were assigned to the Assembly,
                that is, making of the Constitution for
                free India and enacting of ordinary
                laws for the country. These two tasks
                were to be performed on separate days.
                Thus, the Assembly became the first
                Parliament of free India (Dominion
                Legislature). Whenever the Assembly
                met as the Constituent body it was
                chaired by Dr. Rajendra Prasad and
                when it met as the legislative body, it
                was chaired by G.V. Mavlankar. These
                two functions continued till November
                26, 1949, when the task of making the
                Constitution was over.
                    For the first time, the Constituent Assembly met as
                    Dominion Legislature on November 17, 1947 and
                    elected G.V. Mavalankar as its speaker.

                3. The Muslim League members (hail-
                ing from the areas(These are West Punjab, 
                East Bengal, NWFP, Sindh,
                Baluchistan and Sylhet District of Assam. A separate
                Constituent Assembly was set up for Pakistan.) included in the
                Pakistan) withdrew from the Constituent
                Assembly for India. Consequently, the
                total strength of the Assembly came
                down to 299 as against 389 originally
                fixed in 1946 under the Cabinet Mission
                Plan. The strength of the Indian prov-
                inces (formerly British Provinces) was
                reduced from 296 to 229 and those of
                the princely states from 93 to 70. The
                state-wise membership of the Assembly
                as on December 31, 1947, is shown in
                Table 2.5.

        Other Functions Performed

            In addition to the making of the Constitution
            and enacting of ordinary laws, the Constituent
            Assembly also performed the following
            functions:

                1, It ratified India’s membership of the
                Commonwealth in May 1949.

                2. It adopted the national flag on July 22,
                1947,

                3. It adopted the national anthem on
                January 24, 1950.

                4. It adopted the national song on January
                24, 1950.

                5. It elected Dr. Rajendra Prasad as the first
                President of India on January 24, 1950.

            In all, the Constituent Assembly had 11
            sessions over two years, 11 months and 18
            days. The Constitution-makers had gone
            through the Constitutions of about 60
            countries, and the Draft Constitution was
            considered for 114 days. The total expendi-
            ture incurred on making the Constitution
            amounted to 64 lakh.

            On January 24, 1950, the Constituent
            Assembly held its final session. It, however,
            did not end, and continued as the provisional
            parliament of India from January 26, 1950,
            till the formation of new Parliament after
            the first general elections in 1951-52.
                - The Provisional Parliament ceased to exist on April
                17, 1952. The first elected Parliament with the two
                Houses came into being in May 1952.

            The complete list of the sessions of the
            Constituent Assembly is given in Table 2.6.

    COMMITTEES OF THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY

        The Constituent Assembly appointed a
        number of committees to deal with different
        tasks of constitution-making. Out of these,
        eight were major committees and the oth-
        ers were minor committees. The names of
        these committees and their Chairman are
        given below:

        Major Committees

            1. Union Powers Committee - Jawaharlal
            Nehru

            2. Union Constitution Committee -
            Jawaharlal Nehru

            3. Provincial Constitution Committee -
            Sardar Patel

            4. Drafting Committee - Dr. B.R. Ambedkar

            5. Advisory Committee on Fundamental
            Rights, Minorities and Tribal and
            Excluded Areas - Sardar Patel. This
            committee had the following five sub-
            committees:

                (a) Fundamental Rights Sub-Committee -
                J.B. Kripalani

                (b) Minorities Sub-Committee - H.C.
                Mukherjee

                (c) North-East Frontier Tribal Areas and
                Assam Excluded & Partially Excluded
                Areas Sub-Committee - Gopinath
                Bardoloi

                (d) Excluded and Partially Excluded Areas
                (other than those in Assam) Sub-
                Committee - A.V. Thakkar

                (e) North-West Frontier Tribal Areas
                Sub-Committee”
                    - “One of the political consequences of the British
                    Government's statement of June 3, 1947, was that
                    following a referendum, the North-West Frontier
                    Province and Baluchistan became part of the
                    territory of the Dominion of Pakistan and as a
                    result the tribal areas in this region became a
                    concern of that Dominion. The Sub-Committee on
                    the Tribal Areas in the North-West Frontier Province
                    and Baluchistan was not therefore called upon to
                    function on behalf of the Constituent Assembly
                    of India. (B. Shiva Rao, The Framing of India’s
                    Constitution: Select Documents, Volume III, p. 681.)
                    The members of this Sub-Committee were:
                    Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, Khan Abdul Samad
                    Khan and Mehr Chand Khanna. The information
                    about the Chairman is not found.

            6. Rules of Procedure Committee - Dr.
            Rajendra Prasad

            7. States Committee (Committee for
            Negotiating with States) - Jawaharlal Nehru

            8. Steering Committee - Dr. Rajendra Prasad

        Minor Committees

            1. Finance and Staff Committee - Dr. Rajendra Prasad

            2. Credentials Committee - Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar

            3. House Committee - B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya

            4. Order of Business Committee - Dr. K.M. Munshi

            5. Ad-hoc Committee on the National Flag - Dr. Rajendra Prasad

            6. Committee on the Functions of the
            Constituent Assembly - G.V. Mavalankar

            7. Ad-hoc Committee on the Supreme
            Court - S. Varadachari (Not an Assembly
            Member)

            8. Committee on Chief Commissioners’
            Provinces - B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya

            9. Expert Committee on the Financial
            Provisions of the Union Constitution -
            Nalini Ranjan Sarkar (Not an Assembly
            Member)

            10. Linguistic Provinces Commission - 8.K.
            Dar (Not an Assembly Member)

            11. Special Committee to Examine the Draft
            Constitution - Jawaharlal Nehru

            12. Press Gallery Committee - Usha Nath Sen

            13. Ad-hoc Committee on Citizenship - S.
            Varadachari (Not an Assembly Member)

        Drafting Committee

            Among all the committees of the Constituent
            Assembly, the most important committee was
            the Drafting Committee set up on August 29,
            1947. It was this committee that was entrusted
            with the task of preparing a draft of the new
            Constitution. It consisted of seven members.
            They were:

                1. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar (Chairman)

                2. N. Gopalaswamy Ayyangar

                3. Alladi Krishnaswamy Ayyar

                4. Dr. K.M. Munshi

                5. Syed Mohammad Saadullah

                6. N. Madhava Rau (He replaced B.L. Mitter
                who resigned due to ill-health)

                7. T.T. Krishnamachari (He replaced D.P.
                Khaitan who died in 1948)

            The Drafting Committee, after taking into
            consideration the proposals of the various
            committees, prepared the first draft of the
            Constitution of India, which was published
            in February, 1948. The people of India were
            given eight months to discuss the draft and
            propose amendments. In light of the public
            comments, criticisms and suggestions, the
            Drafting Committee prepared a second draft,
            which was published in October, 1948.

            The Drafting Committee took less than six
            months to prepare its draft. In all it sat only
            for 141 days.

    ENACTMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION

        Dr. B.R. Ambedkar introduced the final draft
        of the Constitution in the Assembly on
        November 4, 1948 (first reading). The Assem-
        bly had a general discussion on it for five days
        (till November 9, 1948).

        The second reading (clause by clause con-
        sideration) started on November 15, 1948,
        and ended on October 17, 1949. During this
        stage, as many as 7653 amendments were
        proposed and 2473 were actually discussed in
        the Assembly.

        The third reading of the draft started
        on November 14, 1949. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar
        moved a motion—‘the Constitution as settled
        by the Assembly be passed’. The motion on
        Draft Constitution was declared as passed
        on November 26, 1949, and received the sig-
        natures of the members and the president.
        Out of a total 299 members of the Assembly,
        only 284 were actually present on that day
        and signedthe Constitution. This is also the
        date mentionedin the Preamble as the date
        on which the people of India in the Constitu-
        ent Assembly adopted, enacted and gave to
        themselves this Constitution.

        The Constitution as adopted on Novem-
        ber 26, 1949, contained a Preamble, 395
        Articles and 8 Schedules. The Preamble
        was enacted after the entire Constitution was
        already enacted.

        Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the then Law Minister,
        piloted the Draft Constitution in the Assembly.
        He took a very prominent part in the delibera-
        tions of the Assembly. He was known for his
        logical, forceful and persuasive arguments on
        the floor of the Assembly. He is recognised as
        the ‘Father of the Constitution of India’. This
        brilliant writer, constitutional expert and
        undisputed leader of the Scheduled Castes is
        also known as the ‘chief architect of the Con-
        stitution of India’. On November 19, 2015, the
        Government of India has decided to celebrate
        the November 26 of every year as the “Consti-
        tution Day” (“Samvidhan Divas”) to promote
        constitutional values among citizens.

    ENFORCEMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION

        Some provisions of the Constitution pertain-
        ing to citizenship, elections, provisional
        parliament, temporary and transitional provi-
        sions, and short title contained in Articles 5,
        6, 7, 8, 9, 60, 324, 366, 367, 379, 380, 388, 391,
        392 and 393 came into force on November
        26, 1949, itself.

        The remaining provisions (the major part)
        of the Constitution came into force on Janu-
        ary 26, 1950. This day is referred to in the
        Constitution as the ‘date of its commence-
        ment’, and celebrated as the Republic Day.

        January 26 was specifically chosen as the
        ‘date of commencement’ of the Constitution
        because of its historical importance. It was
        on this day in 1930 that Purna Swaraj day was
        celebrated, following the resolution of the
        Lahore Session (December 1929) of the INC.

        With the commencement of the Constitu-
        tion, the Indian Independence Act of 1947 and
        the Government of India Act of 1935, with all
        enactments amending or supplementing the
        latter Act, were repealed. The Abolition of Privy
        Council Jurisdiction Act (1949) was however
        continued.

    EXPERTS COMMITTEE OF THE CONGRESS

        While elections to the Constituent Assembly
        were still in progress, on July 8, 1946, the
        Congress Party (Indian National Congress)
        appointed an Experts Committee for the pur-
        pose of preparing material for the Constitu-
        ent Assembly. This committee consisted of
        the following members:

            1. Jawaharlal Nehru (Chairman)

            2. M. Asaf Ali

            3. K.M. Munshi

            4. N. Gopalaswami Ayyangar

            5. K.T. Shah

            6. D.R. Gadgil

            7. Humayun Kabir

            8. K. Santhanam

        Later, on the Chairman's proposal, it was
        resolved that Krishna Kripalani be co-opted
        as member and convener of the committee.

        The committee had two sittings, the first
        at New Delhi from July 20 to 22, 1946, and
        the second at Bombay from August 15 to 17,
        1946.

        Apart from a number of notes prepared
        by its members, the committee discussed the
        procedure to be adopted by the Constituent
        Assembly, the question of the appointment
        of various committees and the draft of a reso-
        lution on the objectives of the constitution
        to be moved during the first session of the
        Constituent Assembly.

        On the role played by this committee in the
        making of the Constitution, Granville Austin,
        an American constitutional expert, observed:
        “It was the Congress Experts Committee that
        set India on the road to her present Constitu-
        tion. The committee members, working within
        the framework of the Cabinet Mission Scheme,
        made general suggestions about autonomous
        areas, the powers of provincial Governments
        and the Centre, and about such issues as the
        princely states and the amending power. They
        also drafted a resolution, closely resembling
        the Objectives Resolution”.

    CRITICISM OF THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY

        The critics have criticised the Constituent
        Assembly on various grounds. These are as
        follows:

            1. Not a Representative Body: The crit-
            ics have argued that the Constituent
            Assembly was not a representative body
            as its members were not directly elected
            by the people of India on the basis of
            universal adult franchise.

            2. Not a Sovereign Body: The critics main-
            tained that the Constituent Assembly
            was not a sovereign body as it was
            created by the proposals of the British
            Government. Further, they said that the
            Assembly held its sessions with the per-
            mission of the British Government.

            3. Time Consuming: According to the
            critics, the Constituent Assembly took
            an unduly long time to make the
            Constitution. They stated that the fram-
            ers of the American Constitution took
            only four months to complete their work.
            In this context, Naziruddin Ahmed, a
            member of the Constituent Assembly,
            coined a new name for the Drafting
            Committee to show his contempt for it.
            He called it a “Drifting Committee’.
            The time taken by the framers of other
            constitutions is given in Table 2.7.

            4. Dominated by Congress: The critics
            charged that the Constituent Assembly was
            dominated by the Congress party. In this
            context, Granville Austin, an American
            constitutional expert, remarked: ‘The
            constituent Assembly was a one-party
            body in an essentially one-party country.
            The Assembly was the Congress and the
            Congress was India.

            5. Lawyer-Politician Domination: It is
            also maintained by the critics that the
            Constituent Assembly was dominated by
            lawyers and politicians. They pointed
            out that other sections of the society
            were not sufficiently represented. This,
            to them, is the main reason for the
            bulkiness and complicated language of
            the Constitution.

            6. Dominated by Hindus: According to
            some critics, the Constituent Assembly
            was a Hindu dominated body. Lord
            Viscount Simon called it ‘a body of
            Hindus’. Similarly, Winston Churchill
            commented that the Constituent
            Assembly represented ‘only one major
            community in India’.

    IMPORTANT FACTS

        1. The elephant was adopted as the symbol
        (seal) of the Constituent Assembly.

        2. Sir B.N. Rau was appointed as the consti-
        tutional advisor (Legal Advisor) to the
        Constituent Assembly.

        3. H.V.R. Iyengar was the Secretary to the
        Constituent Assembly.

        4. S.N. Mukherjee was the chief draftsman
        of the constitution in the Constituent
        Assembly.

        5. Prem Behari Narain Raizada was the cal-
        ligrapher of the Indian Constitution.
        The original constitution was handwrit-
        ten by him in a flowing italic style.

        6. The original version was beautified and
        decorated by artists from Shantiniketan
        including Nand Lal Bose and Beohar
        Rammanohar Sinha.

        7. Beohar Rammanohar Sinha illuminated,
        beautified and ornamented the original
        Preamble calligraphed by Prem Behari
        Narain Raizada.

        8. The calligraphy of the Hindi version of
        the original constitution was done by
        Vasant Krishan Vaidya and elegantly deco-
        rated and illuminated by Nand Lal Bose.

    HINDI TEXT OF THE CONSTITUTION

        Originally, the Constitution of India did
        not make any provision with respect to an
        authoritative text of the Constitution in the
        Hindi language. Later, a provision in this
        regard was made by the 58th Constitutional
        Amendment Act of 1987. This amendment
        inserted a new Article 394-A in the last part
        of the Constitution i.e., Part XXII. This article
        contains the following provisions:

            1. The President shall cause to be published
            under his authority:

                (i) The translation of the Constitution
                in Hindi language. The modifica-
                tions which are necessary to bring
                it in conformity with the language,
                style and terminology adopted in
                the authoritative texts of the Central
                Acts in Hindi can be made in it. All
                the amendments of the Constitution
                made before such publication should
                be incorporated in it.

                (ii) The translation in Hindi of every
                amendment of the constitution
                made in English.

            2. The translation of the Constitution and its 
            every amendment published shall be con-
            strued to have the same meaning as the
            original text in English. If any difficulty 
            arises in this matter, the President shall
            cause the Hindi text to be revised suitably.

            3. The translation of the Constitution and
            its every amendment published shall 
            be deemed to be, for all purposes, its 
            authoritative text in Hindi.

            

------------------------------------------------- Messed up multiple Table data -------------------------------------------------
            Table 24 Allocation of seats in the Constituent Assembly of India (1946)
            eLNS > reer sees

 1. British Indian Provinces (11) 292

 2, Princely States (Indian States) 93
 2 Chiei Commissioners: 4

Provinces (4)

Total 389



Table 2.2 Results of the Elections to the Con- Table 2.3. Community-wise Representation in the

stituent Assembly (July-August 1946) Constituent Assembly (1946)
pS anita ss aes 1 Hindus 163
2. Muslim League 73
2. Muslims 80
Si Unionist Party 1
4 Unionist Musiline Fi 3. Scheduled Castes 31
= Unionist Scheduled Castes 1 4. Indian Christians 6
6. __Krishak ~ Praja Party 4 5. Backward Tribes 6
7 Scheduled Castes Federation 1 6. Sikhs 4
8. Sikhs (Non-Congress) 4}
; a Anglo-Indians 3
o: Communist Party 1
40. Independents _ 8 8. Parsees 3
Total 296 Total 296

------------------------------------------------- Messed up multiple Table end -------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------

Table 2.4 Women Members of the Constituent Assembly

SI.No. Name Constituency
43 Ammu Swaminathan Madras/General
“i ie Annie Mascarene Travancore and Cochin Union
3. Begum Ajzaz Rasul United Provinces/Muslim
4. _. Dakshayan! Velayudan Madras/General
aH G. Durgabai Madras/General
6. Hansa Mehta Bombay/General
7. Kamla Chaudhri United Provinces/General
Sy: Leela Ray West Bengal/General
9. Malati Chowdhury Orissa/General
10, Purnima Banerji United Provinces/General

11. Rajkumari Amrit Kaur Central Provinces and Berar/General

12. Renuka Ray West Bengal/General
13. Sarojini Naidu Bihar/General
14. Ae Sucheta Kripalani United Provinces/General
15. Vijayalakshmi Pandit United Provinces/General

Note: In total, the Constituent Assembly had 15 women members.
Source: Selected Speeches of Women Members of the Constituent Assembly, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 2012, page (ix).
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 2.5 State-wise Membership of the Constituent Assembly of India as on December 31, 1947

SI.No. Name No. of Members
A. Provinces (Indian Provinces)—229
Rea a Madras 49
20 Bombay 21
| 3: West Bengal 19
4, United Provinces 55
i 5. East Punjab 12
6. Bihar 36
th C.P. and Berar 7
8. Assam 8
} | 9. Orissa 9
10. Delhi 1
[ n. . Ajmer-Merwara 1
12. Coorg 1
| 'B. Indian States (Princely States)—70

1. Alwar 1
iS 2} a Baroda 3
3. Bhopal 1
| 4. Bikaner cil
5: Cochin 1
6. Gwalior 4
7 Indore 1
| : 8. Jaipur ce
9. Jodhpur 2
| 10. Kolhapur 4
; 11. Kotah 1

, | 12. Mayurbhanj ;
13. Mysore 7
14, Patiala 2

(Contd.)

20 ey Indian Polity

SI.No. Name No. of Members
15. Rewa 2
16. Travancore 6
17. Udaipur 2
18. Sikkim and Cooch| Behar Group 1
19. Tripura, Manipur and Khasi States 1
Group ;
20. U.P. States Group 1
21. Eastern Rajputana States Group 3 |
22. Central India States Group (includ- 3
ae ing Bundelkhand and Malwa)
23. Western India States Group 4
24. Gujarat States Group 2
25. : Deccan and Madras States Group 2
26. Punjab States Group ae
ea Eastern States Group | 4
28, Eastern States Group II 3
2: Residuary States Group 4
Total 299
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 2.6 Sessions of the Constituent Assembly at a Glance
First Session December 9-23, 1946 |
Second Session January 20-25, 1947
Third Session April 28—May 2, 1947
Fourth Session July 14-31, 1947
Fifth Session August 14-30, 1947
Sixth Session January 27, 1948
Seventh Session November 4, 1948—January 8, 1949
Eighth Session May 16—June 16, 1949
Ninth Session July 30-September 18, 1949
‘Tenth Session October 6-17, 1949
Eleventh Session November 14-26, 1949

Note: The Assembly met once again on January 24, 1950, when the members appended their signatures to the
Constitution of India.
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 2.7 Time Taken by the Framers of Other Constitutions!

SI.No. Country No. of Articles Working Period Time Taken
1 U.S.A. iy May 25, 1787 to Less than 4 months
September 17, 1787
2 Canada 147 October 10, 1864 About 2 years and 6 months |
to March 1867 |
3 Australia 128 March 1891 to July 9, 1900 About 9 years
| 4 South Africa 153 October 1908 to September 20,1909 1 year
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 2.8 Articles Related to Short Title, Commencement, Hindi Text and Repeals at a Glance

Article No. Subject Matter

393 Short title

[304 Commencement a |
394A Authoritative text in Hindi language

ES aly S i oe soi esl

Repeals


J.R. Siwach, Dynamics of Indian Government and Politics, Sterling Publishers Private Limited, Second
Edition, 1990, p. 10.
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------



CHAPTER 3 : Concept of the Constitution

    MEANING

        The term ‘constitution’ is derived from the
        Latin word constituere, which means ‘to
        establish’ or ‘to set-up’. In the present sense,
        the term ‘constitution’ refers to a set of prin-
        ciples, which specify the organisation and
        working of the government and the relation-
        ship between the government and the people
        in terms of their rights and duties.

        The constitution is variously described as
        the ‘fundamental law of the land’, ‘supreme
        law of the state’, ‘basic law of the country’,
        ‘instrument of the government’, ‘rules of the
        state’, ‘basic structure of the polity’, ‘grund-
        norm of the country’ and so on.

        Political scientists and Constitutional
        experts have defined the constitution in the
        following way:

            Gilchrist: “The constitution consists of that
            body of rules or laws which determine the
            organization of government, the distribution
            of powers to the various organs of govern-
            ment, and the general principles on which
            these powers are to be exercised.”
                - Gilchrist, R.N., Principles of Political Science, 1961, p. 211.

            Gettell: “The fundamental principles that
            determine the form of a state are called its
            constitution. These include the method of
            which the state is organised, the distribution
            of its sovereign powers among the various
            organs of government, the scope and manner
            of exercise of governmental functions, and the
            relation of the government to the people over
            whom its authority is exercised”.
                - Gettell, R.G., Political Science, 1956, p. 244.

            Wheare: “The Constitution describes the
            whole system of government of a country,
            the collection of rules which establish and
            regulate or govern the government.”
                - Wheare, K.C., Modern Constitutions, 1956, p. 1.

            Wade and Phillips: “A constitution is a docu-
            ment having a special legal sanctity which
            sets out the framework and the principal
            functions of the organs of the Government of
            a State and declares the principles governing
            the operation of those organs.”
                - Wade and Phillips, Constitutional Law, 1965, p. 1.

    - FUNCTIONS
        The constitutional scholar, Elliot Bulmer,
        has very well identified the functions (or
        purposes) of a constitution. His list is
        comprehensive and includes the following
        points:

            1. It can declare and define the boundaries
            of the political community.

            2. It can declare and define the nature and
            authority of the political community.

            3. It can express the identity and values of
            a national community.

            4. It can declare and define the rights and
            duties of citizens.

            5. It can establish and regulate the political
            institutions of the community.

            6. It can divide or share power between dif-
            ferent layers of government or sub-state
            communities.

            7. It can declare the official religious iden-
            tity of the state and demarcate rela-
            tionships between sacred and secular
            authorities.

            8. It can commit states to particular social,
            economic, or developmental goals.

        - Elliot Bulmer, What is a Constitution? Principles
        and Concepts, International IDEA Constitution -
        Building Primer 1, Second Edition, 2017, Inter-
        national Institute for Democracy and Electoral
        Assistance, pp. 6-7.

    QUALITIES

        There are some qualities (or characteristics)
        of a good constitution. These are explained
        below:

            1. Brevity: A constitution should be precise
            and should not contain unwanted provi-
            sions. A lengthy constitution with too
            many details creates confusion in the
            interpretation of its clauses.

            2. Clarity: A constitution should specify its
            provisions in clear terms. A complicated
            language would reduce the degree of its
            understanding.

            3. Definiteness: A constitution should
            contain a definite meaning for its pro-
            visions. The ambiguous and different
            meanings would increase the discretion
            of the judges in their interpretation.

            4, Comprehensiveness: A constitution
            should be comprehensive in laying
            down the powers of the government as
            well as the rights and duties of the citi-
            zens. This would reduce the scope for
            controversies and litigations.

            5. Suitability: A constitution should reflect
            the needs and aspirations of the people.
            It must be suitable to the historical,
            socio-cultural, economic and political
            conditions of the nation.

            6. Stability: A constitution should facilitate
            political stability and should not allow
            easy tampering. This would strengthen
            the obedience of the citizens to the
            constitution,

            7. Adaptability: A constitution should be
            dynamic and not static. It should be able
            to adapt itself to changing situations
            and requirements. It should be a living
            document.

    CLASSIFICATION

        The constitutions are classified into the fol-
        lowing types:

            1. Evolved and Enacted

                On the basis of evolution, the constitutions
                are Classified into evolved and enacted con-
                stitutions. An evolved constitution is the
                outcome of a slow and gradual evolutionary
                process. Its provisions are contained in the
                form of conventions, practices, principles,
                and judicial decisions. It is also known
                as a cumulative constitution and the Brit-
                ish Constitution is a good example in this
                regard.

                An enacted constitution, on the other hand,
                is deliberately made by a constituent assembly
                or a constitutional council or promulgated by
                a king or parliament. Its provisions are con-
                tained in the form of a book or a document
                or a series of documents. It is also known as a
                conventional constitution and the American
                and Indian Constitutions are the good exam-
                ples in this regard.

            2. Written and Unwritten

                On the basis of incorporation of provisions,
                the constitutions are classified into writ-
                ten and unwritten constitutions. A written
                constitution is one in which the provisions
                are incorporated in the form ‘of a book or
                a document or a series of documents. It is
                consciously formulated and adopted by a
                body known as the constituent assembly or
                the constitutional convention or by any other
                name. It is also known as a documentary con-
                stitution or a codified constitution. The con-
                stitutions of the USA, Canada, Japan, France
                and India are some of the good examples in
                this regard.

                An unwritten constitution, on the other
                hand, is one in which most of the provisions
                are not incorporated in the form of a book
                or a document or a series of documents. It is
                found in the form of conventions, practices,
                principles, charters, statutes, and judicial
                decisions. It is a product of historical evolu-
                tion and not deliberately formulated by a
                body. It is also known as a non-documentary
                constitution or an uncodified constitution
                and the constitutions of UK, New Zealand
                and Israel are the good examples in this
                regard.

                The distinction between a written constitu-
                tion and an unwritten constitution is more
                or less the same as is between an evolved
                constitution and an enacted constitution.

            3. Rigid and Flexible

                Based on the method of amendment, the con-
                stitutions are classified into rigid and flexible
                constitutions. This classification was given by
                Lord James Bryce.
                    - Bryce, J., Studies in History and Jurisprudence,
                    Volume 1, p. 127.

                A rigid constitution is one, which can-
                not be amended in the same manner as the
                ordinary laws. It requires a special procedure
                for its amendment. In other words, it makes
                a distinction between the constitutional law
                and the ordinary law. A flexible constitu-
                tion, on the other hand, is one which can be
                amended in the same manner as the ordinary
                laws. It does not require a special procedure
                for its amendment. In other words, it does not
                make a distinction between the constitutional
                law and the ordinary law.

                A flexible constitution is also known as an
                elastic constitution and the constitutions of
                UK and New Zealand are some good examples
                in this regard. A rigid constitution is also
                known as an inelastic constitution and the
                constitutions of the USA, Australia and Swit-
                zerland are some examples in this regard.
                The Constitution of India is neither rigid nor
                flexible, but a synthesis of both.

            4. Federal and Unitary

                Based on the nature of relationship between
                the national government and the regional
                governments, the constitutions are classi-
                fied into federal and unitary constitutions.
                A federal constitution is one which provides
                for a division of power between the national
                government and the regional governments..
                It enables them to operate in their respec-
                tive jurisdictions independently. A unitary
                constitution, on the other hand, is one which
                provides for the concentration of power in the
                hands of the national government. It makes
                the regional governments to operate as the
                subordinate agencies of the national govern-
                ment and exercise only such powers which
                may be delegated to them by the national
                government.

                Federal constitution is prevalent in the
                USA, Switzerland, Australia, Canada, Rus-
                sia, Brazil, and some other states. Unitary
                constitution is prevalent in the UK, France,
                Japan, China, Italy, Norway, and other states.
                The Constitution of India contains both the
                federal provisions as well as the unitary provi-
                sions. Hence, it was described as quasi-federal
                by K.C. Wheare.

            5. Procedural and Prescriptive

                According to the constitutional scholar, Elliot
                Bulmer, two broad constitutional archetypes
                can be identified: the procedural and the pre-
                scriptive. The difference between these two
                types of constitutions relate to the nature and
                purposes of the document itself (Same as footnote 5 above, pp. 9-10.).

                A procedural constitution defines the legal
                and political structures of public institutions
                and sets out the legal limits of government
                power to protect democratic processes and
                fundamental human rights.

                In addition to describing how the
                government functions, a prescriptive con-
                stitution assumes (or attempts to impose) a
                broad consensus on common societal goals
                that public authorities must strive to achieve.

    CONSTITUTIONALISM AND CONSTITUTIONAL GOVERNMENT

        1. Meaning

            The concepts of constitution and constitution-
            alism are closely related to each other. But,
            there are a few differences between them; like:

                1. Acountry may have the ‘constitution’ but
                not necessarily ‘constitutionalism’. For
                example, a country with a dictatorship,
                where the dictator’s word is law, can
                be said to have a ‘constitution’ but not
                ‘constitutionalism.
                    - Jain, M.P, Indian Constitutional Law, Eight
                    Edition, Lexis Nexis, Gurgaon, 2018, p. 6.

                2. Constitutionalism recognises the need for
                government with power but, at the same
                time, insists that limitations should be
                placed on those powers. Unlimited power
                may lead to an authoritarian, oppres-
                sive government which jeopardises the
                freedom of the people. Only when the
                constitution of a country imposes limi-
                tation upon governmental power, does
                a country have not only a ‘constitution’
                but also ‘constitutionalism' (Ibid).

                3. The concept of constitutionalism is that
                of a polity governed by or under a con-
                stitution that ordains essentially limited
                government and rule of law as opposed
                to arbitrary, despotic, authoritarian or
                totalitarian rule. Constitutional govern-
                ment should necessarily be democratic
                government. Arbitrary power in the
                hands of any individual or institution -
                even if conferred by a constitutional
                document - is a negation of the concept
                of constitutionalism.
                    - Kashyap, Dr. Subhash C., Constitutional Law of
                    India, Second Edition, Volume 1, Universal Law
                    Publishing, Gurgaon, 2015, p. 7.

                4, Constitutionalism desires a political order
                in which the power of the government
                are limited. It is another name for the
                concept of a limited, and for this reason,
                a “civilized” government. The real justi-
                fication of the constitution finds place
                in having a “limited government” and of
                requiring those who govern to conform
                to laws and rules.
                    - Johari, J.C., Comparative Politics, Fourth Edition,
                    Sterling Publishers Private Limited, New Delhi,
                    2011, p. 217.

        2. Definition

            The concepts of constitutionalism and con-
            stitutional government have been defined in
            the following way:

                Friedrich: “Constitutionalism provides a
                system of effective restraints upon govern-
                mental action. It is a body of rules ensur-
                ing fairplay, thus rendering the government
                responsible”.
                    - Friedrich, Carl J., Constitutional Government and
                    Democracy, Oxford and IBH, Calcutta, 1964, p. 25.

                Roucek: “Constitutionalism means essen-
                tially limited government. It is the antithesis
                of government by the unrestrained will be
                of rulers. Regardless of the actual form of
                effectiveness of restraints, it assumes limita-
                tions on government as opposed to arbitrary
                government”.
                    - Roucek, J.S. and Others, Introduction to Political
                    Science, 1954, p. 981.

                Wheare: “Constitutional government means
                something more than a government accord-
                ing to the terms of a constitution. It means
                government according to rule as opposed
                to arbitrary government; it means govern-
                ment limited by the terms of a constitu-
                tion, not government limited only by the
                desires and capacities of those who exercise
                power”.
                    Wheare, K.C., Modern Constitutions,
                    University Press, London, 1956, p. 137.

                Ybema: “A form of government can only be
                classified as constitutional when the rulers
                are subject to a body of rules and principles,
                which limit the exercise of their power.

            Constitutional government is the antithesis
            of arbitrary rule.
                - Yhema, S.P., Constitutionalism and Civil Liberties,
                Leiden University Press, Leiden, 1973, p. 1.

        3. Elements

            The constitutional scholar, Louis Henkin,
            identified eight elements (features or prin-
            ciples) of constitutionalism. These are men-
            tioned below:
                1. Popular sovereignty

                2. Rule of law

                3. Democratic government (responsible and
                accountable government)

                4. Separation of powers (checks and
                balances)

                5. An independent judiciary

                6. Civilian control of the military

                7. Police governed by law and judicial
                control

                8. Respect for individual rights

            - Henkin, Louis, A New Birth of Constitutionalism:
            Genetic Influences and Genetic Defects, Chapter 2
            in Constitutionalism, Identity, Difference and
            Legitimacy: Theoretical Perspectives, Edited by
            Michel Rosenfeld, Duke University Press, Durham,
            1994, pp. 39-54.
                

CHAPTER 4: SALIENT FEATURES OF THE CONSTITUTION

    The Indian Constitution is unique
    in its contents and spirit. Though
    borrowed from almost every Con-
    stitution of the world, the Constitution
    of India has several salient features that
    distinguish it from the Constitutions of the
    other countries.

    It should be noted at the outset that a num-
    ber of original features of the Constitution (as
    adopted in 1949) have undergone a substantial
    change, on account of several amendments,
    particularly 7th, 42nd, 44th, 73rd, 74th, 97th
    and 101st Amendments. In fact, the 42nd
    Amendment Act (1976) is known as ‘Mini-
    Constitution’ due to the important and large
    number of changes made by it in various parts
    of the Constitution, However, in the Kesavana-
    nda Bharati case (Kesavananda Bharati vs. State of Kerala, (1973)),
    the Supreme Court
    ruled that the constituent power of Parliament
    under Article 368 does not enable it to alter the
    ‘basic structure’ of the Constitution.

    Salient Features of the Constitution

        The salient features of the Constitution, as it
        stands today, are as follows:

            1. Lengthiest Written Constitution

                Constitutions are classified into written, like
                the American Constitution, or unwritten, like
                the British Constitution. The Constitution
                of India is the lengthiest of all the written
                Constitutions of the world. It is a very com-
                prehensive, elaborate and detailed document.

                Originally (1949), the Constitution con-
                tained a Preamble, 395 Articles (divided into
                22 Parts) and 8 Schedules. Presently, it consists
                of a Preamble, about 470 Articles (divided
                into 25 Parts) and 12 Schedules. The vari-
                ous amendments carried out since 1951 have
                deleted about 20 Articles and one Part (VII)
                and added about 95 Articles, four Parts (IVA,
                IXA, IXB and XIVA) and four Schedules (9, 10,
                11 and 12). No other Constitution in the world
                has so many Articles and Schedules.
                    The American Constitution originally consisted
                    of only 7 Articles, the Australian 128, the Chinese
                    138, and the Canadian 147,

                The Parts, Important Articles and Schedules
                of the Constitution of India are mentioned in
                Tables 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 respectively.

                Four factors have contributed to the ele-
                phantine size of our Constitution. They are:
                    (a) Geographical factors, that is, the vastness
                    of the country and its diversity.

                    (b) Historical factors, e.g., the influence of
                    the Government of India Act of 1935,
                    which was bulky.

                    (c) Single Constitution for both the Centre
                    and the states.

                    (d) Dominance of legal luminaries in the
                    Constituent Assembly.

                The Constitution contains not only the
                fundamental principles of governance, but
                also detailed administrative provisions. Fur-
                ther, those matters which in other modern
                democratic countries have been left to the
                ordinary legislation or established political
                conventions have also been included in the
                constitutional document itself in India.


                Till 2019, the erstwhile State of Jammu and
                Kashmir had its own constitution and thus
                enjoyed a special status by virtue of Article
                370 of the Constitution of India. In 2019, this
                special status was abolished by a presidential
                order known as “The Constitution (Applica-
                tion to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 2019". This
                order superseded the earlier order known as
                “The Constitution (Application to Jammu and
                Kashmir) Order, 1954”. The 2019 order extended
                all the provisions of the Constitution of India
                to Jammu and Kashmir also.

                Further, the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani-
                sation Act, 2019, bifurcated the erstwhile State
                of Jammu and Kashmir into two separate
                Union territories, namely, the Union territory
                of Jammu & Kashmir and the Union territory
                of Ladakh.

            2. Drawn from Various Sources

                The Constitution of India has borrowed most of
                its provisions from the Constitutions of various
                other countries as well as from the Government
                of India Act of 1935°. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar proudly
                acclaimed that the Constitution of India has
                been framed after ‘ransacking all the known
                Constitutions of the World.
                    - About 250 provisions of the 1935 Act have been
                    included in the Constitution.
                    - Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume VU, pp. 35-38.

                The structural part of the Constitution is, to
                a large extent, derived from the Government
                of India Act of 1935. The philosophical part of
                the Constitution (the Fundamental Rights and
                the Directive Principles of State Policy) derives
                its inspiration from the American and Irish
                Constitutions, respectively. The political part
                of the Constitution (the principle of Cabinet
                Government and the relations between the
                Executive and the Legislature) has been largely
                drawn from the British Constitution’.
                    - P.M. Bakshi, The Constitution of India,
                    Universal, Fifth Edition, 2002, p.4.

                The other provisions of the Constitution have
                been drawn from the Constitutions of Canada,
                Australia, Germany, USSR (now Russia), France,
                South Africa, Japan and so on.

                The most profound influence and mate-
                rial source of the Constitution is the Govern-
                ment of India Act, 1935. The Federal Scheme,
                Judiciary, Governors, Emergency Powers,
                the Public Service Commissions and most
                of the administrative details are drawn from
                this Act. More than half of the provisions of
                Constitution are identical to or bear a close
                resemblance to the Act of 1935.
                    - Brij Kishore Sharma, Introduction to the Constitution
                    of India, Seventh Edition, 2015, PHI Learning Private
                    Limited, p.42.

                The features (provisions) of the Constitution
                that have been borrowed from various sources
                are mentioned in Table 4.4.

            3. Blend of Rigidity and Flexibility

                Constitutions are also classified into rigid
                and flexible. A rigid Constitution is one that
                requires a special procedure for its amend-
                ment, as for example, the American Consti-
                tution. A flexible constitution, on the other
                hand, is one that can be amended in the same
                manner as the ordinary laws are made, as for
                example, the British Constitution.

                The Constitution of India is neither rigid
                nor flexible, but a synthesis of both. Article
                368 provides for two types of amendments:

                    (a) Some provisions can be amended by a
                    special majority of the Parliament, i.é., a
                    two-third majority of the members of each
                    House present and voting, and a majority
                    of the total membership of each House.

                    (b) Some other provisions can be amended
                    by a special majority of the Parliament
                    and with the ratification by half of the
                    total states.

                At the same time, some provisions of the
                Constitution can be amended by a simple
                majority of the Parliament in the manner of
                ordinary legislative process. Notably, these
                amendments do not come under Article 368.

            4. Federal System with Unitary Bias

                The Constitution of India establishes a federal
                system of Government. It contains all the
                usual features of a federation, viz., two Gov-
                ernments, division of powers, written Con-
                stitution, supremacy of Constitution, rigidity
                of Constitution, independent judiciary and
                bicameralism.

                However, the Indian Constitution also con-
                tains many unitary or non-federal features,
                viz., a strong Centre, single Constitution,
                single citizenship, flexibility of Constitution,
                integrated judiciary, appointment of state
                governor by the Centre, all-India services,
                emergency provisions and so on.

                Moreover, the term ‘Federation’ has nowhere
                been used in the Constitution. Article 1, on
                the other hand, describes India as a ‘Union
                of States’ which implies two things: one, the
                Indian Federation is not the result of an agree-
                ment by the states; and two, no state has the
                right to secede from the federation.

                Hence, the Indian Constitution has been
                variously described as ‘federal in form but,
                unitary in spirit’, ‘quasi-federal’ by K.C.
                Wheare, ‘bargaining federalism’ by Morris
                Jones, ‘co-operative federalism’ by Granville
                Austin, ‘federation with a centralising ten-
                dency’ by Ivor Jennings and so on.

            5. Parliamentary form of Government

                The Constitution of India has opted for the
                British Parliamentary System of Government
                rather than the American Presidential System
                of Government. The parliamentary system is
                based on the principle of co-operation and co-
                ordination between the legislative and execu-
                tive organs while the presidential system is
                based on the doctrine of separation of powers
                between the two organs.

                The parliamentary system is also known
                as the ‘Westminster’ Model of Govern-
                ment, responsible Government and Cabinet
                Government. The Constitution establishes the
                parliamentary system not only at the Centre,
                but also in the states.
                    - Westminster is a place in London where the British
                    Parliament is located. It is often used as a symbol/
                    synonym of the British Parliament.



                The features of parliamentary government in
                India are:

                    (a) Presence of nominal and real executives
                    (b) Majority party rule
                    (c) Collective responsibility of the executive
                    to the legislature
                    (d) Membership of the ministers in the
                    legislature
                    (e) Leadership of the Prime Minister or the
                    Chief Minister
                    (f) Dissolution of the lower House (Lok
                    Sabha or Assembly)

                Even though the Indian parliamentary
                system is largely based on the British pat-
                tern, there are some fundamental differences
                between the two. For example, the Indian Par-
                liament is not a sovereign body like the British
                Parliament. Further, the Indian State has an
                elected head (republic) while the British State
                has a hereditary head (monarchy).

                In a parliamentary system whether in
                India or Britain, the role of the Prime Minis-
                ter has become so significant and crucial that
                the political scientists like to call it a ‘Prime
                Ministerial Government’.

            6. Synthesis of Parliamentary Sovereignty and Judicial Supremacy

                The doctrine of sovereignty of Parliament is
                associated with the British Parliament, while
                the principle of judicial supremacy with that
                of the American Supreme Court.

                Just as the Indian parliamentary system
                differs from the British system, the scope of
                judicial review power of the Supreme Court in
                India is narrower than that of what exists in the
                US. This is because the American Constitution
                provides for ‘due process of law’ against that of
                ‘procedure established by law’ contained in the
                Indian Constitution (Article 21).

                Therefore, the framers of the Indian Con-
                stitution have preferred a proper synthesis
                between the British principle of parliamentary
                sovereignty and the American principle of
                judicial supremacy. The Supreme Court, on
                the one hand, can declare the parliamentary
                laws as unconstitutional through its power of
                judicial review. The Parliament, on the other
                hand, can amend the major portion of the
                Constitution through its constituent power.

            7. Integrated and Independent Judiciary

                The Indian Constitution establishes a judicial
                system that is integrated as well as indepen-
                dent.

                The Supreme Court stands at the top of the
                integrated judicial system in the country. Below
                it, there are high courts at the state level. Under
                a high court, there is a hierarchy of subordinate
                courts, that is, district courts and other lower
                courts. This single system of courts enforces
                both the central laws as well as the state laws,
                unlike in USA, where the federal laws are
                enforced by the federal judiciary and the state
                laws are enforced by the state judiciary.

                The Supreme Court is a federal court, the
                highest court of appeal, the guarantor of
                the fundamental rights of the citizens and
                the guardian of the Constitution. Hence, the
                Constitution has made various provisions to
                ensure its independence—security of tenure
                of the judges, fixed service conditions for the
                judges, all the expenses of the Supreme Court
                charged on the Consolidated Fund of India,
                prohibition on discussion on the conduct of
                judges in the legislatures, ban on practice after
                retirement, power to punish for its contempt
                vested in the Supreme Court, separation of the
                judiciary from the executive, and so on.

            8. Fundamental Rights

                Part III of the Indian Constitution guarantees
                six fundamental rights to all the citizens:

                    (a) Right to Equality (Articles 14-18)

                    (b) Right to Freedom (Articles 19-22)

                    (c) Right against Exploitation (Articles
                    23-24)

                    (d) Right to Freedom of Religion (Articles
                    25-28)

                    (e) Cultural and Educational Rights (Articles
                    29-30) and

                    (f) Right to Constitutional Remedies
                    (Article 32)

                Originally, the Constitution provided for
                seven Fundamental Rights. However, the Right
                to Property (Article 31) was deleted from the list
                of Fundamental Rights by the 44th Amendment
                Act of 1978. It is made a legal right under Article
                300-A in Part XII of the constitution.

                The Fundamental Rights are meant for pro-
                moting the idea of political democracy. They
                operate as limitations on the tyranny of the
                executive and arbitrary laws of the legislature.
                They are justiciable in nature, that is, they are
                enforceable by the courts for their violation. The
                aggrieved person can directly go to the Supreme
                Court which can issue the writs of habeas corpus,
                mandamus, prohibition, certiorari and quo war-
                ranto for the restoration of his rights.

                However, the Fundamental Rights are not
                absolute and subject to reasonable restrictions,
                Further, they are not sacrosanct and can be
                curtailed or repealed by the Parliament through
                a Constitutional Amendment Act. They can
                also be suspended during the operation of a
                National Emergency except the rights guaran-
                teed by Articles 20 and 21.

            9. Directive Principles of State Policy

                According to Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the Directive
                Principles of State Policy is a ‘novel feature’
                of the Indian Constitution. They are enumer-
                ated in Part IV of the Constitution. They can
                be classified into three broad categories—
                socialistic, Gandhian and liberal-intellectual.

                The Directive Principles are meant for
                promoting the ideal of social and economic
                democracy. They seek to establish a ‘wel-
                fare state’ in India. However, unlike the
                Fundamental Rights, the directives are non-
                justiciable in nature, that is, they are not
                enforceable by the courts for their violation.
                Yet, the Constitution itself declares that ‘these
                principles are fundamental in the governance
                of the country, and it shall be the duty of the
                state to apply these principles in making
                laws’. Hence, they impose a moral obligation
                on the state authorities for their application.
                But, the real force (sanction) behind them is
                political, that is, public opinion.

                In the Minerva Mills case® (1980), the
                Supreme Court held that ‘the Indian Constitu-
                tion is founded on the bedrock of the balance
                between the Fundamental Rights and the Direc-
                tive Principles’.
                    - Minerva Mills vs. Union of India, (1980).

            10. Fundamental Duties

                The original constitution did not provide for
                the Fundamental Duties of the citizens. These
                were added during the operation of internal
                emergency (1975-77) by the 42nd Constitu-
                tional Amendment Act of 1976 on the recom-
                mendation of the Swaran Singh Committee.
                The 86th Constitutional Amendment Act of
                2002 added one more fundamental duty.

                Part IV-A of the Constitution (which con-
                sists of only one Article 51-A) specifies the
                eleven Fundamental Duties viz., to respect
                the Constitution, national flag and national
                anthem; to protect the sovereignty, unity
                and integrity of the country; to promote the
                spirit of common brotherhood amongst all
                the people; to preserve the rich heritage of
                our composite culture and so on.

                The fundamental duties serve as a reminder
                to citizens that while enjoying their rights,
                they also have to be quite conscious of duties
                they owe to their country, their society and
                to their fellow-citizens. However, like the
                Directive Principles, the duties are also non-
                justiciable in nature.

            11. A Secular State

                The Constitution of India stands for a Secu-
                lar State. Hence, it does not uphold any par-
                ticular religion as the official religion of the
                Indian State. The following provisions of the
                Constitution reveal the secular character of
                the Indian State:

                    (a) The term ‘secular’ was added to the
                    Preamble of the Indian Constitution by
                    the 42nd Constitutional Amendment Act
                    of 1976.

                    (b) The Preamble secures to all citizens of
                    India liberty of belief, faith and worship.

                    (c) The State shall not deny to any person
                    equality before the law or equal protec-
                    tion of the laws (Article 14).

                    (d) The State shall not discriminate against
                    any citizen on the ground of religion
                    (Article 15).

                    (e) Equality of opportunity for all citizens
                    in matters of public employment
                    (Article 16).

                    (f) All persons are equally entitled to free-
                    dom of conscience and the right to
                    freely profess, practice and propagate
                    any religion (Article 25),

                    (g) Every religious denomination or any of
                    its sections shall have the right to man-
                    age its religious affairs (Article 26).

                    (h) No person shall be compelled to pay any
                    taxes for the promotion of a particular
                    religion (Article 27).

                    (i) No religious instruction shall be provided
                    in any educational institution main-
                    tained by the State (Article 28).

                    (j) Any section of the citizens shall have the
                    right to conserve its distinct language,
                    script or culture (Article 29).

                    (k) All minorities shall have the right to
                    establish and administer educational
                    institutions of their choice (Article 30).

                    (1) The State shall endeavour to secure for
                    all the citizens a Uniform Civil Code
                    (Article 44).

                The Western concept of secularism con-
                notes a complete separation between the reli-
                gion (the church) and the state (the politics).
                This negative concept of secularism is inap-
                plicable in the Indian situation where the
                society is multireligious. Hence, the Indian
                Constitution embodies the positive concept
                of secularism, i.e., giving equal respect to all
                religions or protecting all religions equally.

                Moreover, the Constitution has also abol-
                ished the old system of communal represen-
                tation(The 1909, 1919, and 1935 Acts provided for communal
                representation), that is, reservation of seats in the
                legislatures on the basis of religion. However, it
                provides for the temporary reservation of seats
                for the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes
                to ensure adequate representation to them.

            12. Universal Adult Franchise

                The Indian Constitution adopts universal
                adult franchise as a basis of elections to the
                Lok Sabha and the state legislative assemblies.
                Every citizen who is not less than 18 years of
                age has a right to vote without any discrimi-
                nation of caste, race, religion, sex, literacy,
                wealth and so on. The voting age was reduced
                to 18 years from 21 years in 1989 by the 61st
                Constitutional Amendment Act of 1988.

                The introduction of universal adult fran-
                chise by the Constitution-makers was a bold
                experiment and highly remarkable in view
                of the vast size of the country, its huge popu-
                lation, high poverty, social inequality and
                overwhelming illiteracy.
                    - Even in the western countries, the right to vote was
                    extended only gradually. For example, USA gave
                    franchise to women in 1920, Britain in 1928, USSR
                    (now Russia) in 1936, France in 1945, Italy in 1948
                    and Switzerland in 1971.

                Universal adult franchise makes democ-
                racy broad-based, enhances the self-respect
                and prestige of the common people, upholds
                the principle of equality, enables minorities
                to protect their interests and opens up new
                hopes and vistas for weaker sections.

            13. Single Citizenship

                Though the Indian Constitution is federal and
                envisages a dual polity (Centre and states), it
                provides for only a single citizenship, that is,
                the Indian citizenship.

                In countries like the USA, on the other
                hand, each person is not only a US citizen but
                also a citizen of the particular state to which
                he belongs. Thus, he owes allegiance to both
                and enjoys dual sets of rights—one conferred
                by the National government and another by
                the state government.

                In India, all citizens irrespective of the state
                in which they are born or reside enjoy the
                same political and civil rights of citizenship
                all over the country and no discrimination 1s
                made between them.

                Despite the constitutional provision for a
                single citizenship and uniform rights for all
                the people, India has been witnessing commu-
                nal riots, class conflicts, caste wars, linguistic
                clashes and ethnic disputes. This means that
                the cherished goal of the Constitution-makers
                to build a united and integrated Indian nation
                has not been fully realised.

            14. Independent Bodies

                The Indian Constitution not only provides for
                the legislative, executive and judicial organs
                of the Government (Central and state) but
                also establishes certain independent bodies.
                They are envisaged by the Constitution as
                the bulkworks of the democratic system of
                Government in India. These are:

                    (a) Election Commission to ensure free and
                    fair elections to the Parliament, the state
                    legislatures, the office of President of
                    India and the office of Vice-president of
                    India.

                    (b) Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
                    to audit the accounts of the Central
                    and state governments. He acts as the
                    guardian of public purse and com-
                    ments on the legality and propriety of
                    Government expenditure.

                    (c) Union Public Service Commission to
                    conduct examinations for recruitment
                    to All-India services and higher Central
                    services and to advise the President on
                    disciplinary matters.
                        - At present, there are three All-India services, namely
                        Indian Administrative Service (IAS), Indian Police
                        Service (IPS) and Indian Forest Service (IFoS). In
                        1947, Indian Civil Service (ICS) was replaced by IAS
                        and the Indian Police (IP) was replaced by IPS and
                        were recognised by the Constitution as All-India
                        Services. In 1963, IFoS was created and it came into
                        existence in 1966.

                    (d) State Public Service Commission in every
                    state to conduct examinations for recruit-
                    ment to state services and to advice the
                    governor on disciplinary matters.

                The Constitution ensures the indepen-
                dence of these bodies through various provi-
                sions like security of tenure, fixed service
                conditions, expenses being charged on the
                Consolidated Fund of India, and so on.

            15. Emergency Provisions

                The Indian Constitution contains elaborate
                emergency provisions to enable the President
                to meet any extraordinary situation effectively,
                The rationality behind the incorporation
                of these provisions is to safeguard the.
                sovereignty, unity, integrity and security of
                the country, the democratic political system
                and the Constitution.

                The Constitution envisages three types of
                emergencies, namely:

                    (a) National emergency on the ground of war
                    or external aggression or armed rebel-
                    lion” (Article 352)
                        - The 44th Amendment Act (1978) has replaced the
                        original term ‘internal disturbance’ by the new
                        term ‘armed rebellion’.

                    (b) State emergency (President's Rule) on
                    the ground of failure of Constitutional
                    machinery in the states (Article 356) or
                    failure to comply with the directions of
                    the Centre (Article 365)

                    (c) Financial emergency on the ground of
                    threat to the financial stability or credit
                    of India (Article 360)

                During an emergency, the Central Govern-
                ment becomes all-powerful and the states go
                into the total control of the centre. It converts
                the federal structure into a unitary one with-
                out a formal amendment of the Constitution.
                This kind of transformation of the political
                system from federal (during normal times)
                to unitary (during emergency) is a unique
                feature of the Indian Constitution.

            16. Three-tier Government

                Originally, the Indian Constitution, like any
                other federal Constitution, provided for a
                dual polity and contained provisions with
                regard to the organisation and powers of the
                Centre and the states. Later, the 73rd and 74th
                Constitutional Amendment Acts (1992) have
                added a third-tier of Government (i.e., local)
                which is not found in any other Constitution
                of the world.

                The 73rd Amendment Act of 1992 gave
                constitutional recognition to the panchayats
                (rural local governments) by adding a new
                Part IX and a new Schedule 11 to the Con-
                stitution. This Part provides for a three-tier
                system of panchayati raj in every state, i.e.,
                Panchayats at the village, intermediate and
                district levels. Similarly, the 74th Amendment
                Act of 1992 gave constitutional recognition to
                the municipalities (urban local governments)
                by adding a new Part IX-A and a new Schedule
                12 to the Constitution. This Part provides for
                three types of municipalities in every state,
                i.e., nagar panchayat for a transitional area,
                municipal council for a smaller urban area
                and municipal corporation for a larger urban
                area.

            17. Co-operative Societies

                The 97th Constitutional Amendment Act of
                2011 gave a constitutional status and protec-
                tion to co-operative societies. In this context,
                it made the following three changes in the
                Constitution:

                    1. It made the right to form co-operative
                    societies a fundamental right (Article 19).

                    2. It included a new Directive Principle of
                    State Policy on promotion of co-operative
                    societies (Article 43-B).

                    3. It added a new Part IX-B in the
                    Constitution which is entitled as “The
                    Co-operative Societies” (Articles 243-ZH
                    to 243-ZT).

                The new Part IX-B contains various provi-
                sions to ensure that the co-operative societ-
                ies in the country function in a democratic,
                professional, autonomous and economically
                sound manner. It empowers the Parliament
                in respect of multi-state cooperative societies
                and the state legislatures in respect of other
                co-operative societies to make the appropriate
                law.

    CRITICISM OF THE CONSTITUTION

        The Constitution of India, as framed and
        adopted by the Constituent Assembly of India,
        has been criticized on the following grounds:

            1. A Borrowed Constitution

                The critics opined that the Indian Constitu-
                tion contains nothing new and original. They
                described it as a ‘borrowed Constitution’ ora
                ‘bag of borrowings’ or a ‘hotch-potch Constitu-
                tion’ or a ‘patchwork’ of several documents
                of the world constitutions. However, this criti-
                cism is unfair and illogical. This is because,
                the framers of the Constitution made neces-
                sary modifications in the features borrowed
                from other constitutions for their suitability
                to the Indian conditions, at the same time
                avoiding their faults.

                While answering the above criticism in the
                Constituent Assembly, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the
                Chairman of the Drafting Committee, said:
                “One likes to ask whether there can be any-
                thing new in a Constitution framed at this hour
                in the history of the world. More than hundred
                years have rolled over when the first written
                Constitution was drafted. It has been followed
                by many countries reducing their constitutions
                to writing. What the scope of a Constitution
                should be has long been settled. Similarly,
                what are the fundamentals of a Constitution
                are recognized all over the world. Given these
                facts, all Constitutions in their main provisions
                must look similar. The only new things, if there
                can be any, in a Constitution framed so late in
                the day are the variations made to remove the
                faults and to accommodate it to the needs of
                the country. The charge of producing a blind
                copy of the Constitutions of other countries is
                based, I am sure, on an inadequate study of the
                Constitution”.
                    - Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume VII,
                    pp. 35-38.

            2. A Carbon Copy of the 1935 Act

                The critics said that the framers of the Con-
                stitution have included a large number of the
                provisions of the Government of India Act of
                1935 into the Constitution of India. Hence,
                they called the Constitution as a “Carbon
                Copy of the 1935 Act” or an “Amended Version
                of the 1935 Act”, For example, N. Srinivasan
                observed that the Indian Constitution is “both
                in language and substance a close copy of the
                Act of 1935”. Similarly, Sir Ivor Jennings, a
                British Constitutionalist, said that “the Consti-
                tution derives directly from the Government
                of India Act of 1935 from which, in fact, many
                of its provisions are copied almost textually”.

                Further, P.R. Deshmukh, a member of the
                Constituent Assembly, commented that “the
                Constitution is essentially the Government of
                India Act of 1935 with only adult franchise
                added”.

                The same Dr. B.R. Ambedkar answered the
                above criticism in the Constituent Assembly in
                the following way: “As to the accusation that the
                Draft Constitution has reproduced a good part
                of the provisions of the Government of India
                Act, 1935, I make no apologies. There is nothing
                to be ashamed of in borrowing. It involves no
                plagiarism. Nobody holds any patent rights in
                the fundamental ideas of a Constitution. What
                I am sorry about is that the provisions taken
                from the Government of India Act, 1935, relate
                mostly to the details of administration’ (Ibid).

            3. Un-Indian or Anti-Indian

                According to the critics, the Indian Constitu-
                tion is ‘un-Indian’ or ‘anti-Indian’ because it
                does not reflect the political traditions and
                the spirit of India. They said that the foreign
                nature of the Constitution makes it unsuit-
                able to the Indian situation or unworkable
                in India, In this context, K. Hanumanthaiya,
                a member of the Constituent Assembly,
                commented: “We wanted the music of Veena
                or Sitar, but here we have the music of an Eng-
                lish band. That was because our Constitution-
                makers were educated that way’ (Constituent 
                Assembly Debates, Volume XI, p. 616.). Similarly,
                Lokanath Misra, another member of the Con-
                stituent Assembly, criticized the Constitution
                as a “slavish imitation of the west, much more -
                a slavish surrender to the west”. Further,
                Lakshminarayan Sahu, also a member of the
                Constituent Assembly, observed: “The ideals
                on which this draft Constitution is framed
                have no manifest relation to the fundamental
                spirit of India. This Constitution would not
                prove suitable and would break down soon
                after being brought into operation”.

            4. An Un-Gandhian Constitution

                According to the critics, the Indian Con-
                stitution is un-Gandhian because it does
                not contain the philosophy and ideals of
                Mahatma Gandhi, the father of the Indian
                Nation. They opined that the Constitution
                should have been raised and built upon vil-
                lage panchayats and district panchayats. In
                this context, the same member of the Con-
                stituent Assembly, K. Hanumanthaiya, said:
                “That is exactly the kind of Constitution
                Mahatma Gandhi did not want and did not
                envisage”.'* T. Prakasam, another member
                of the Constituent Assembly, attributed this
                lapse to Ambedkar’s non-participation in
                the Gandhian movement and the antago-
                nism towards the Gandhian ideas.'

            5. Elephantine Size

                The critics stated that the Indian Consti-
                tution is too bulky and too detailed and
                contains some unnecessary elements. Sir
                Ivor Jennings, a British Constitutionalist,
                observed that the provisions borrowed were
                not always well-selected and that the consti-
                tution, generally speaking, was too long and
                complicated.”

                In this context, H.V. Kamath, a member of
                the Constituent Assembly, commented: “The
                emblem and the crest that we have selected
                for our assembly is an elephant. It is perhaps
                in consonance with that our constitution too
                is the bulkiest that the world has produced’”
                He also said: “I am sure, the House does not
                agree that we should make the Constitution
                an elephantine one”.

            6. Paradise of the Lawyers

                According to the critics, the Indian Constitu-
                tion is too legalistic and very complicated.
                They opined that the legal language and
                phraseology adopted in the constitution
                makes it a complex document. The same Sir
                Ivor Jennings called it a “lawyer's paradise”.

                In this context, H.K. Maheswari, a member
                of the Constituent Assembly, observed: “The
                draft tends to make people more litigious,
                more inclined to go to law courts, less truth-
                ful and less likely to follow the methods of
                truth and non-violence. If I may say so, the
                draft is really a lawyer's paradise. It opens up
                vast avenues of litigation and will give our
                able and ingenious lawyers plenty of work
                to do”.

                Similarly, PR. Deshmukh, another mem-
                ber of the Constituent Assembly, said: “I
                should, however, like to say that the draft of
                the articles that have been brought before the
                House by Dr. Ambedkar seems to my mind
                to be far too ponderous like the ponderous
                tomes of a law manual. A document dealing
                with a constitution hardly uses so much of
                padding and so much of verbiage. Perhaps
                it is difficult for them to compose a docu-
                ment which should be, to my mind, not a
                law manual but a socio-political document,
                a vibrating, pulsating and life-giving docu-
                ment. But, to our misfortune, that was not to
                be, and we have been burdened with so much
                of words, words and words which could have
                been very easily eliminated."

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 44 Parts of the Constitution at a Glance

Parts
|

i]

Ill

IV
IV-A
V

Vi

Vil
Vill

IX-A
IX-B

Xl

Xl

Xlll
XIV

Subject Matter

The Union and its territory

Citizenship —

Fundamental Rights

Directive Principles of State Policy

Fundamental Duties

The Union Government

Chapter | — The Executive

Chapter || — Parliament

Chapter Ill — Legislative Powers of President
Chapter (V — The Union Judiciary

Chapter V — Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
The State Governments

Chapter | — General

Chapter ll — The Executive

Chapter Ill — The State Legislature

Chapter IV — Legislative Powers of Governor
Chapter V — The High Courts

Chapter VI — Subordinate Courts

The States in Part B of the First Schedule (deleted)
The Union Territories

The Panchayats

The Municipalities

The Co-operative Societies

The Scheduled and Tribal Areas

Relations between the Union and the States
Chapter | — Legislative Relations

Chapter Il — Administrative Relations

Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits

Chapter | — Finance

Chapter Il — Borrowing

Chapter III — Property, Contracts, Rights, Liabilities, Obligations and Suits
Chapter IV ~ Right to Property

Trade, Commerce and Intercourse within the Territory of India

Services under the Union and the States

Articles Covered

1to 4

5 to 11

12 to 35

36 to 51

51-A

52 to 151

52 to 78

“79 to 122

123

124 to 147
148 to 151
152 to 237
152

153 to 167
168 to 212
213

214 to 232
233 to 237
238 (deleted)
239 to 242
243 to 243-0
243-P to 243-26
243-ZH to 243-ZT
244 to 244-4
245 to 263
245 to 255
256 to 263
264 to 300-A
264 to 291
292 to 293
294 to 300
300-A

301 to 307
308 to 323

Salient Features of the Constitution X 37

{|

Parts Subject Matter : Articles Covered
Chapter | — Services 308 to 314
Chapter t= Public Service Commissions 31510323
XIV-A Tribunals Pcs 323. A to 323-B
ae = Seat on ; EE a 24 410 204 s 7
XVI Special Provisions relating to Certain Classes : & Soe 330 to 342-A ;
" XVil_— Official Language MER ee Nae Rego eRe TiT|
: ie Chapter | — Language of the Union 343 to 344
‘Chapter l-Regional Languages, = tsti(‘éNS tOT |
_Chapter I= Language of the Supreme Court, High Courts, and s so on 348 to 349
even, ss Chapter iV- Special I Directives he ira: eae 350 to 351° a =|
| XVIll Emergency Provisions : 352 to 360
[-ahiglMeceecetee ae eee eR page ote
XX Amendment of the Constitution 368
[  xXI__Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions = if AO Seote aaa =
XXII Short title, Commencement, Authoritative Text in Hindi and Repeals Z 393 to 305

Note: Part VII (dealing with Part-B states) was deleted by the 7th Amendment Act (1956). On the other hand, both
Part IV-A and Part XIV-A were added by the 42nd Amendment Act (1976), while Part IX-A was added by the 74th
Amendment Act (1992), and Part IX-B was added by the 97th Amendment Act (2011).
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 4.2 Important Articles of the Constitution at a Glance

Articles Deals with

1 Name and territory of the Union

ae ee a

3 Formation of new states and alteration of areas, poundanes or names of existing states |

13 rane inconsistent with or in SSIES) of the fundamental Fee?

SSS el HR a i ie yy

14 Equality before law |

15 =P LOBIIGN of discrimination ¢ on | grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or r place of bith

[oo Se wis PONE Sg eee ene

| 16 ' Baualiey of Oppertunity: in matters of public employment |

7 Seoeiuion of untouchability

Eanes Bie SE

I 19 “Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech, etc.

Roe sees

2 Protection a life and peseral ee

I ; 1
ae 214 - Right to elementary education

25 Freedom of conscience end fies sraression; pete and propagation of Essen

eS eS Swe les ie St —

30. Right of minorities te establish and administer educational institutions |

32 Remedies for enforcement of fundamental fights including writs

ee el

[ 38 “State to secure a social order for the SR omencn of welfare of the people

(Contd.)

—————————EO

38 iv Indian Polity

Articles Deals with

4@ Organisation of village panchayats

4A Uniform civil code for the citizens
45 Provision for early childhood care and education to children below the age of 6 years.

46 Promotion of educational and economic interests of scheduled castes, scheduled tribes and other
weaker Sections

50 Separation of judiciary from executive
51 —_Fromotion of international peace and security

S44 Fundamental duties

Wa Power of president to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit or commute sentences in certain cases
74 Council of ministers to aid and advise the president
110. Definition of Money Bills
442. Annual financial statement (Budget)
423 : Power of president to promulgate ‘ordinances during recess of Parliament
443 Power of president to consult Supreme Court

: 455 Appointment of governor

461 Power of governor to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit or commute sentences in certain cases

: 463. Council of ministers to-ald and advise the governor

169 Abolition or creation of legislative councils in states
< 200 Assent to bills by governor (including reservation for President)
213 Power of governor to promulgate ordinances during recess of the state legislature
- 226 Power of high courts to issue certain writs
229A Special provisions with respect to Delhi
: = 249 Power of Parliamentte legislate with respect toa matter in the State List in the nationa: interest
262 Adjudication of disputes relating to waters of inter-state rivers or river valleys
263 Provisions with respect to an inter-state council
275 Grants from the Union to certain states
-278A Goods and Services Tax Council
230 Finance Commission
300 Slits and proceedings
300A Persons not to be deprived of property save by authority of law (Right to property)
341 Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of persons employed in civil capacities under the Union or a state.
312 . All-India Services

— 315 ~~ Public service commissions for the Union and for the states

Salient Features of the Constitution bey 39

Articles Deals with ,

320 Functions of Public service commissions

sa.

323-A— Administrative tribunals . |

324 SP GCUMLE GEES) direction and control ‘of elections to be vested in an Election Commission

330 Reservation of seats for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in the House of the People

335 Claims of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes to services and posts

EN

352 Proclamation of Emergency (National Emergency)

356 Provisions in case of failure ‘of constitutional machinery i in states (President's Rule)

360 Provisions as to fi nancial EMEMGeneys |

365 Effect of failure to comply with, or to give effect to, >, directions ¢ given by the Unign (President's Rule)

368 Power oF Parliament to amend the Constitution and procedure therefor |
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 4.3 Schedules of the Constitution at a Glance

Numbers Subject Matter ‘ Articles Covered
First Schedule 1. Names of the States and their territorial jurisdiction. tand4
| ai Names of the Union Territories and their extent. — |
Second Schedule Provisions relating to the emoluments, allowances, privileges and so 59, 65, 75, 97,
on of: 125, 148, 158, 164,
186 and 221

1. The President of India

ORS eae |

2. The Governors of States

| 3. The Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha
4. The Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha

5. The Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly in i |
ue ene, the States

6. The Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council in
the States

Sa aE
| =f mines The = Judges « of th the Supreme Court
8. The Judges of the High Courts

9. The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India i

ee ee

Third Schedule Forms of Oaths or Affirmations for: 75, 84, 99, 124,
148, 164, 173, 188
and 219

pete, eT ae a Sed

a

1. The Union ministers

2. The candidates for election to the Parliament

| eit 3. The members of Parliament

4. The judges of the Supreme Court

———

5. The Comptroller and Auditor-General of india |
(Contd.)

40 ie Indian Polity

Numbers

Fourth Schedule

Fifth Schedule

Sixth Schedule

Seventh Schedule

Eighth Schedule

Ninth Schedule

Tenth Schedule

Eleventh Schedule

Tweifth Schedule

Subject Matter

6. The state ministers

7, The candidates for election to the state legislature
8. The members of the state legislature

9. The judges of the High Courts

Allocation of seats in the Rajya Sabha to the states and the union

territories.

Provisions relating to the administration and control of scheduled areas

and scheduled tribes.

Provisions relating to the administration of tribal areas in the states of
Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.

Division of powers between the Union and the States in terms of List |
(Union List), List Il (State List) and List Ill (Concurrent List). Presently, the
Union List contains 98 subjects (originally 97), the State List contains
59 subjects (originally 66) and the Concurrent List contains 52 subjects

(originally 47).

Languages recognized by the Constitution. Originally, it had 14 languages
but presently there are 22 languages. They are: Assamese, Bengali,
Bodo, Dogri (Dongri), Gujarati, Hindi, Kannada, Kashmiri, Konkani, Mathili
(Maithili), Malayalam, Manipuri, Marathi, Nepali, Odia, Punjabi, Sanskrit,
Santhali, Sindhi, Tamil, Telugu and Urdu. Sindhi was added by the 21st
Amendment Act of 1967; Konkani, Manipuri and Nepali were added by
the /ist Amendment Act of 1992; and Bodo, Dongri, Maithili and Santhali
were added by the 92nd Amendment Act of 2003. Oriya was renamed
as ‘Odia’ by the 96th Amendment Act of 2011.

Acts and Regulations (originally 13 but presently 282)°° of the state
legislatures dealing with land reforms and abolition of the zamindari
system and of the Parliament dealing with other matters. This schedule
was added by the 1st Amendment (1951) to protect the laws included in
It from judicial review on the ground of violation of fundamental rights.
However, the Supreme Court ruled that the laws included in this schedule
after April 24, 1973~", are open to judicial review.

Provisions relating to disqualification of the members of Parliament and
State Legislatures on the ground of defection. This schedule was added
by the 52nd Amendment Act of 1985, also known as Anti-defection Law.

Specifies the powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats.
It has 29 matters. This schedule was added by the 73rd Amendment

Act of 1992.

Specifies the powers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities. It
has 18 matters. This schedule was added by the 74th Amendment Act

of 1992.

Articles Covered |

4 and 80

244

244 and 275

246

344 and 351

102 and 191

243-G

243-W

“Though the last entry is numbered 284, the actual total number is 282. This is because, three entries (87,92
and 130) have been deleted and one entry is numbered as 257-A.

“This is the date on which the Supreme Court delivered its judgement in the Kesavananda Bharati vs. State
of Kerala case. This case is popularly known as the Fundamental Rights case.
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 4.4 Sources of the Constitution at a Glance

Sources’ Features Borrowed

1.

10.

Government of India Act of 1935

British Constitution

US Constitution

ltish Constitution

Canadian Constitution

Australian Constitution

Weimar Constitution of Germany
Saviet Constitution (USSR, now
Russia)

French Constitution

South African Constitution

Japanese Constitution

Federal Scheme, Office of governor, Judiciary, Public Service
Commissions, Emergency provisions and administrative details.

Parliamentary government, Rule of Law, legislative procedure, single
citizenship, cabinet system, prerogative writs, parliamentary privileges |
and bicameralism.

Fundamental rights, independence of judiciary, judicial review, impeach-
ment of the president, removal of Supreme Court and high court judges
and post of vice-president.

Directive Principles of State Policy, nomination of members to Rajya
Sabha and method of election of president.

Federation with a strong Centre, vesting of residuary powers in the
Centre, appointment of state governors by the Centre, and advisory
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.

|
Concurrent List, freedom of trade, commerce and inter-course, and joint
sitting of the two Houses of Parliament. |

Emergency provisions relating to suspension of Fundamental Rights.

Fundamental duties and the ideal of justice (social, economic and politi- |
cal) in the Preamble.

Republic and the ideals of liberty, equality and fraternity in the
Preamble.

Procedure for amendment of the Constitution and election of members |
of Rajya Sabha.

Procedure established by Law.
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------


Chapter 5: Preamble of the Constitution

    The Amcrican Constitution was the first
    to begin with a Preamble. Many countries, including India, fol/owed this
    practice. The term 'Preamble' refers to the
    introduction or prefa ce to the Co nst itut ion. It
    contains the summary or essence orthe Constitution. N.A. Palkhiva la, an eminent jur ist
    and co nstitutio nal expert, called the Preamble
    as the 'identity card of the Constitution.

    The Preamble to the Indian Co nstitution is
    based 011 the 'Objectives Resolution ', drafted
    and moved by Pandit Ne hru, and adopted
    by the Co nstituent Assembly, It lUI S been
    amended by the 42nd Constitutional Amendment Act ( 1976), which added three new
    words-Socialist, Secular and Integrity.
        Moved by Nehru on December 13, 1946 and adopted
        by the Constituent Assem bly on .Janu,lry 22, 1947.

    TEXT OF THE PREAMBLE
        The Preamble in its preselH form reads:

            "We, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having
            solemnly resolved to constitute India
            into a SOVEREI GN SOC IALIST SECULAR
            DEMOCRATIC RE PUBLIC and to secure
            to all its ci ti zens:

                JUSTICE, Social, Economic and Po litical;
                L I BERTY of thought, expression,
                bel ief, faith and worship;
                EQUA LITY of st.1.luS and of opportun ity; and to promote among them all;
                FRATERNITY assuring the dignity
                of the in dividua l and the un ity and
                integrity of the Nation;
            I N OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY th is
            twenty-s ixth day of November, 1949, do
            HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND G IVE TO
            OURSELVES T I-lLS CONSTITUTION".

    INGREDIENTS OF THE PREAMBLE
        The Preamble revea ls four ingredients or
        components:
            1. Source of auuthorily of the Co nst it ution:
            The Preamble states that the Constitution
            derives its authority from the people of
            India.

            2. Nature of the Indian State: It dec lares
            India to be of a sove reign, socialist, secular democ ratic and rep u blican polity.

            3. Ohjectives of the Constitution: It spec ifies
            justice, liberty, equality and fraternity
            as the objectives.

            4. Date of adotion of the Constitution: It
            stipulates November 26, 1949, as the date.

    KEY WORDS IN THE PREAMBLE
        Certain key words-Sovereign, Socialist, Secular, Democrati c, Republic, Justice , Liberty,
        Equality ilnd Fraternity-arc explained ,IS
        follows:

            1. Sovereign
                The word 'sove reign ' implies that India is
                neither a dependency nor a dominion of
                any other nat ion, but an independent state.
                There is no authority above it, and it is free
                to co nduct its own affairs (both internal a nd
                external).
                    - Till the passage of the Indian Indepe ndence
                    Act, 1947, India was a depe nde ncy (colony) of
                    the British Empire. From August IS, 1947 to
                    January 26, 1950, India 's political status was that
                    of a dominion in the British Commonwea lth of
                    Na tions. Ind ia ceased to be a British dominion on
                    January 26, 1950, by declaring herself a sovereign
                    republic. However, Pakistan continued to be a
                    British Dominion until 1956.
                Though in 1949, India declared the co ntinuation of her full membership of the
                Commonwea lth of Na tions an d accepted the
                British Crown as the head of the Co mmonwealth, this ext ra-con stitutional decla rat ion
                does n ot affect India 's sove rei gnty in a ny
                manner. Further, India 's membership of
                the United Na tions Organisati on (UNO) also
                in no way co nstitutes a limitation on h er
                sovereignty".
                    - To dispel the lurking fears of so me members
                    of the Constituent Assembly, Pandit Nehru
                    said in 1949 thus: ' We took pledge long ago to
                    ach ieve Puma Swaraj. We have ach ieved it. Does
                    a nation lose its indepen dence by an a lli a nce
                    with a nothe r country? Alliance normall y means
                    commitm ents. The free association of the
                    sovere ign Co mmonwealth of Nat ions does not
                    involve such commitme nts. Its very stre ngth li es
                    in its flexibilit y a nd its complete freedom . It is
                    well-known that it is open to any member-n ation
                    to go out of th e commonwealth if it so chooses'. He
                    further stated, ' It is an agreement by free will, to
                    be termina ted by fre e will '.
                    - 1ndia became a member of the UNO in 1945.
                Being a sove reign state, India can either
                acquire a foreign territory or cede a part of
                its territo ry in favour of a foreign state.

            2. Socialist
                Even before the term 'socialist' was added by
                the 42nd Amendment in 1976, the Co nstitution had a socialist content in the form of
                certain Directive Principles of State Poli cy.
                In other words, what was hitherto impli cit
                in th e Const itution ha s now b een mad e
                expli cit. Moreover, the Co ngress party itself
                adopted a resolutionS to establish a 'socialistic
                pattern of society' in its Avadi session as ea rly
                as in 1955 and took mea sures accordingly.
                    - The Resolution said: 'In order to realise the object
                    of Congress and to furth e r the objectives sta ted
                    in the Prea mble and Directive Principles of State
                    Policy of the Constitution of India, planning should
                    take place with a view to the establishment of a
                    socialistic pattern of society, where the pri ncipal
                    means of productio n are under social own ership
                    or control, production is progressively speeded up
                    and there is equitable distribution of the national
                    wealth'.

                Notably, the Indian brand of socialism is
                a 'dem ocrati c socialism' and not a 'communi sti c socialism ' (also known as ' state socia lism ') whi ch involves the n at ionalisation of
                all means of production and distribution a nd
                the abolition of pri vate property. Democratic
                socialism, on the other hand, holds faith in
                a 'mi xed eco nomy' where both publi c a nd
                private sectors co-exist side-by-side6 . As the
                Supreme Court says, 'Democrati c socia lism
                aims to end poverty, ignoran ce, disease a nd
                inequality of opportunit/ . Indian socia lism is a bl end of Marxism and Gandhism,
                lea nin g h eav ily towards the Gandhian
                socia lism' (Nakara vs. Union of India ( 1982)).
                    - The Prime Minister, Indira Ga ndhi , said, 'We
                    have always said that we have our own brand of
                    socialism. We will nationalise the sectors where we
                    feel the necessity. Just nationa lisation is not our
                    type of socialism'.
                    - G.B. Pant University of Agriculture and Thchllology
                    vs. Stare of Utta r Pradesh (2000)

                The new Econom ic Policy (1991) of liberalisation, privatisation and globalisation has,
                however, diluted the socialist credentials of
                the Indian State.

            3. Secular
                The term 'secular' too was added by the 42nd
                Constitutional Amendment Act of 1976.
                Howeve r, as the Supreme Court said in 1974,
                although the words 'secular state,9 were no t
                ex pressedl y mentioned in the Co nst itution ,
                there ca n be no d o ubt that Co n stituti o nm a kers wanted to establi sh suc h a state a nd
                accordin g ly Articl es 25 to 28 (guarantee ing
                the fundam e ntal right to fre edom of religion )
                have bee n included in the co nst itution .
                    On the basis of the attitude of the state towards
                    religio n, three types of sta tes c.'ln be co nceived of:
                        (a) Afheistic Stafe; The state is anti-religion and
                        hence, condem ns all religions.
                        (b) Theocrat ic State: The state is pro-religion a nd
                        hence, declares one particular religion as the
                        state reJigion ,as for examp le, Bangladesh,
                        Burma, Sri Lanka, Pakistan, and so on.
                        (c) Secular State; The stale is neutral in the ma tter
                        of religion a nd hence, docs not uphold any
                        particu lar reli gion as the state re ligion, as for
                        example, USA and India.
                    c.s. I)ande, CalisrihuiOlW/ Law of India,
                    Allahabad L..'lW Agency, eighth edition, 2002,
                    p.222.

                The India n Co nstitu tio n e mbodies the positi ve co ncep t of secu larism, i.e, a ll rel igio n s in
                our country ( irres pective of their st re ngth)
                have the sa me status and support from t he
                state.
                    The then Union L..'lW Minister, H.R. Cokhale
                    defined this co ncept as: 'nlere will be freedom,
                    liberty of faith and worship, whateve r religion
                    you belong to. The Sta te will not have anything
                    to do, as a state, with any religion e.'(cepti ng to
                    treat every religion equally, but the State will not
                    have any found ation of religio n'. Si milarl y, P.1l
                    Cajendragadkilr, a former Chief Just ice of India,
                    defined secularism as in the Indian Co nstitution
                    in the fo llowing way: 'The State docs not owe
                    loya lty to any particular religion as such: it is not
                    irrel igio us or anti-religious; it gives equal freedom
                    to all religions'.
                    lIThe tenn 'democracy' is derived from two Greek
                    words, namely, Demos and Kralia mea ning ' People'
                    a nd 'rul e' respect ively.

            4. Democratic
                A democratic" po li ty, as stip ulated in the
                Prea mble, is based 011 the doctr in e of popular
                sovere ignty, that is, possess io n of su preme
                power by the peopl e.

                Democracy is of two typ es- d.irect and indirect. In direct de mocracy, t he people exe rci se
                their supre m e power directly as is th e case in
                Switze rland . T here are four devices of direct
                de moc racy, namely, Referendum , Initiative,
                Recall and Plebiscite. In indirect democracy, on th e othe r ha nd, th e representatives
                e lect ed by the peopl e exe rc ise t he supreme
                power a nd thus ca rryo n the government and
                m a ke th e laws. This ty pe of democracy, also
                known as represe ntative democracy, is of two
                kinds-pa rliamentary and pres ide ntial .
                    Referendum is a procedure whereby a proposed
                    "legislation is referred to the electorate for
                    settlemen t by their direct votes.

                    Initiative is a method by mea ns of which the
                    people ca n propose a bill to the legislature for
                    enactmen t.

                    Recall is a method by means of which the voters
                    ca n remove a representative or an officer before
                    the expiry of his tenn, when he fails to discharge
                    hi s duties properly.

                    Plebiscite is a method of obta ining the opinion
                    of people on any issue of public importance. It is
                    genera lly used t0 solve the terri torial disputes.
                
                The In dian Constitut ion provides for representative parli ame n ta ry democracy under
                which the executive is responsible to the legisla ture for all its policies a nd actions. Uni ve rsa l adult fran chise, peri odi c e lection s, rule of
                law, independence of jud iciary, and absence
                o f di scrimin at ion on certai n grou nds arc the
                mani festatio ns of the democratic character of
                the India n polity.

                The te·rm 'democ ra tic' is lI sed in the Preamble in the broader sense embracing not
                o nly politi ca l democ racy but a lso soc ial and
                eco nomi c democracy.

                This dimension was stressed by Dr. Ambedka r in his co ncluding speech in the Co nstituent Assembly o n Novembe r 25, 1949, in the
                following way:

                    PoJitica l democracy ca nnot last unless
                    there li es at t he base of it socia l democracy.
                    What does soc ia l democracy mean? It m ea ns
                    a way of life whi ch recogni ses liberty, equa lity and fraternity. The principles of liberty,
                    equality a nd fraternity are not to be treated as
                    separate items in a trinity. They form a union
                    of trinity in the sense that to divorce on e
                    from the other is to defeat the very purpose
                    of democra cy. Liberty cannot be divorced
                    from equ ality, equality cannot be divorced
                    from liberty. Nor ca n liberty and equality b e
                    divorced from fraternity. Without equality,
                    liberty would produce the supremacy of the
                    few over th e many. Equality without liberty,
                    would ki11 individual initiative".
                        B. Shiva Rao, The Framing of Il1elia's COl1s titutioll:
                        Select Documents, Volume IV, p . 944 .

                In the sa me co ntext , the Supreme Court
                observed in 1997 that: "The Constitution envision s to establish an ega litarian social order
                rendering to every citizen social, economic
                a nd political justice in a social and econ omic
                democracy of the Sharat Republic".

            5. Republic
                democratic polity ca n be c1assified into
                two categories-mona rchy and republic. In a
                mona rchy, th e head of the state (usually king
                or queen) enjoys a hereditary position , that
                is, he lsh e comes to office through succession,
                e.g., Britain . In a republic, on the other hand,
                the head of the state is always elected directly
                or indirectl y for a fixed period, e.g., USA.

                Th erefore, the term ' re public' in our Preamble indicates that India has an elected
                head call ed the presiden t. Hel she is elected
                indirectly for a fix ed period of fi ve yea rs.

                A republic also means two more things: one,
                vesting of politica l sovereignty in the people
                and not in a single individual like a king; second, the absence of any privileged c1ass and
                hen ce all public offices being opened to every
                citizcn without any discrimination.

            6. Justice
                The term 'justice' in the Preamble embraces
                three distin ct forms -social, economic and
                political, secured through various provisions
                of Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles.

                Social justice denotes the equal treatment of
                all citizens without any social distinction based
                on caste, colour, race, religion, sex and so on.
                It means absence of privileges being extended
                to any particular section of the society, and
                improvem ent in the conditions of backward
                c1asses (SCs, S'lS and OBes) and wom en.

                Economic justice denotes th e non-di scrimination between people on the basis of
                eco nomic factors. It involves the elimination
                of glaring inequ alities in wealth, income and
                property. A co mbination of social justice and
                economic justice denotes what is known as
                'distributive justice'.

                Political justice implies that all citize ns
                sh o uld h ave equal political rights, equal
                access to all political offices and equal voice
                in the governm ent.

                The ideal of justice-social, economic and
                political-has been taken from th e Russia n
                Revolutio n (1917).

            7. Liberty
                The term ' lib erty' mean s the absence of
                restraints on th e activities of individuals, and
                at the same tim e, providing opportunities for
                the developm ent of individu al personaliti es.

                The Preamble secures to al1 citizens of
                India liberty of thought, express ion, belief,
                faith and worship, through their Fundamental
                Rights, enforceable in co urt of1aw, in case of
                violation .

                Liberty as elaborated in the Preamble is very
                essential for the successful functioning of the
                Indian democratic system. However, liberty
                does not mean 'Hcense' to do what one Hkes,
                and has to be enjoyed within the ]imitations
                mention ed in the Constitution itself. In brief,
                the liberty con ce ived by the Preamble or fundamen tal Rights is not absolute but qualified.

                The ideals of liberty, equaBty and fraternity in our Prea mble have been taken from
                the French Rev01ution (1789-1799).

            8. Equality
                The term 'equality' mea ns the absence of special privileges to any section of the society,
                a nd th e provisio n of adequate opportunities
                for a ll indi viduals without any d iscriminatio n.

                The Prea mbl e secures to <Ill c iti ze ns of
                India equ a lity of status a nd o pportunity.
                Thi s provision e mbraces three dimension s of
                equality-civ ic, politi ca l a nd eco nomic.

                The fo llowing provision s of the chapter o n
                Fu nda mental Rig hts ensure civ ic equality:

                    (a) Equality be fo re the law (ArtiCle 14).
                    (b) Prohibition of discrimination on grounds
                    of re li gion, ra ce, caste, sex or pla ce of
                    birth (Article 15).
                    (c) Equality o f opportunity in matte rs o f
                    public e mpl oyment (Art icle 16).
                    ( d ) Abolition of untou chab ili ty (Articl e 17).
                    (e) Abo li tion of t itles (Article 18).

                There are two provisions in the Constitution
                that seek to achieve politica l equality. One, no
                perso n is to be declared ineligibl e for inclusion in electora l rolls on grounds of re ligi o n ,
                race, caste or sex (A rticle 325). '1\\'0, election s
                to the Lok Sab ha a nd th e state asse mblies to
                be on the ba sis of ildul t suffrage (A rti cle 326).

                The Directi ve Prin c ipl es o f State Poli cy
                (A rticl e 39) secures to men a nd women equal
                right to an ad equa te means ofl ivelihood a nd
                equal pay for eq ua l work.

            9. Fraternity

                Fraternity means a sense of brotherhood.
                The Co nstitutio n promotes this fee ling of
                fratern ity by the system of si ng le citizenship,
                Also, the Fundamental Duties (Article 51-A)
                say that it shall be the duty of every citize n of
                India to promote harmony a nd the spirit of
                co mmon brothe rh ood amongst a ll the peopl e
                of India transcending re lig ious, linguist ic ,
                regio nal or sectio nal di vers iti es.

                T h e Preambl e declare s that frater nity
                has to assure two things-th e dignity of the
                individual and the uni ty a nd integrity of the
                natio n . The word ' in tegrity' has been added
                to the preamble by the 42nd Co nst itut io nal
                Amendment ( 1976).

                According to K.M, Munsh i, a member of
                the Drafting Co mmittee of t he Constituent
                Assembly, the phrase 'dig nity ofthe individua l'
                signifies that the Constitution not only e nsures
                material be tterm e nt and 1l1<Iintai n a democratic set-up, but that it a lso recognises th at
                the personality of every individual is sacred.
                Thi s is highlig hted through som e of th e provisions of the Fundame nta l Rights and Directive
                Principles ofSt.'1te Policy, whi ch ensu re the dignity of individual s, Further, t he Fundamental
                Duti es (A rticle 51-A) a lso protect the di gni ty
                of women by s1.:'1 ting that it sha ll be the du ty
                of every citi zen of India to renounce practices
                derogatory to the dignity of women , and a lso
                ma kes it the duty of every citizen of India to
                uphold and protect the sove re ig nty, unity and
                integri ty of In dia.

                The phra se ' unity and in teg rity of th e
                nati on' embraces both t he psyc hologi ca l and
                te rritori a l dim e ns ion s of nat iona l integration . Article J of the Const ituti on describes
                India as a 'U ni on of States' to make it clear
                t hat t he states have no right to secede from
                the Unio n, imply'i ng t he indestructible nature
                of the Ind ian Union, It aims at overcoming
                hindran ces to national integration like co mmu nali sm , reg ionali sm , caste ism , lingui sm ,
                secession ism and so on.

    SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PREAMBLE
        The Preambl e e mbodies the basic philosophy
        a nd fundamental va lues-poli t ica l, moral and
        religiou s- on whi ch the Co nst itutio n is based,
        It co ntain s the grand and nobl e vision of the
        Co nstituent Assembly, and refle cts the dreams
        and asp irat io ns of the founding fathers of
        the Constitu t ion, In the words of Sir Alladi
        Krishnaswami Iyer, a member ofthe Constitue nt Assembly who played a s ig n ifi ca nt role
        in making t he Co nstitution, 'The Preambl e
        to our Co nstit ution expresses what we had
        thought or drea mt so long '.

        According to K.M. Munshi, a m ember o f
        the Drafting Co mmittee of the Con stitu e nt
        Assembly, the Prea mble is the ' horoscope of
        our sovereign democratic re publi c ',

        Pandit Thakur Das Bha rgava, another m e mbe r of th e Co nst ituent Assemb ly, summed
        up th e importance of the Prea mble in the
        follow ing words: 'The Prea mble is the most
        precio us part of the Con stituti on . It is the soul
        of the Const itution . It is a key to the Consti tutio n. It is a jewel set in the Const itution . It is a
        prope r ya rdstick with which one ca n measu re
        the worth of the Co nstitu tion'.

        Sir Ernes t Barker, a djstin guishe d Engli sh
        politic al sc ientis t, paid a glowin g tribut e to
        the politica l wisdo m of the autho rs of the Preamble. He descri bed the Pream ble as the 'keyn o te,13 to the Con stituti on . He was so moved
        by the text of the pream bl e that he quoted l4 it
        at the openi ng of hi s popul ar book , Principles
        of Social and Politica l Theory (1951).
            - He said that the Prea mble of the India n
            Consti tution states 'in a b rief and pithy form
            the argum ent of much o f the book; and it m ay
            accord ingly serve as a key-no te'.
            - He wrote: 'I a m all th e m ore nlOved to
            quote it
            becau se I am proud that the people ofI ndia should
            begin their indepe n den t life by subscr ibing to the
            princip les of a politic al traditio n which we in the
            west call wester n, but whi ch is n ow so methin g
            more than the western'.

        M. Hidayatullah , a forme r Chief Ju stice of
        India , observ ed, 'Pream ble resem bles the Declaratio n of Indep e nde nce of the United States
        of Amer ica, but is more than a declar ation .
        It is the sou l of our Co nstitu tion , which lays
        down the patter n of o ur po liti ca l societ y. It
        contai ns a sol emn resolve, wh ich nothin g bu t
        a revolu tion ca n alter.
            - M Hidaya tullah , Democracy in India and th e
            Judicial Process, p . 51.

    PREAMBLE AS PART OF THE CON STIT UTIO N
        One of the contro ve rsies about the Prea mbl e
        is as to whet11er it is a part of the Consti tution
        or not.

        In the Berubari Un ion l 6 case ( 1960), the
        Supre me Court said that the Pream ble shows
        the gener al purpo ses be hind the seve ra l
        provi sions in the Co nstitu tion , and is thus a
        key to the minds of the maker s of the Constitut io n . Furthe r, where the terms used in any a rticle a re ambig uous o r capab le of m ore than one
        m ea ning, som e ass istanc e at interp retatio n
        may be taken from the object ives enshr ined
        in the Prea mble. Despi te this recogn ition of
        the signi fi can ce of the Prea mble, the Supre me
        Court specif ical1 y opine d that Prea mble is not
        a pa rt of the Con stituti o n.

        In the Kesaval1anda Blwra ti case 17 (1973 ),
        the Supre me Court reject ed the ea rlier opinion a nd he ld that Pream ble is a part of the
        Const itutio n . It observ ed that the Pream ble
        is of extre m e impor tance and the Co n stitution shoul d be rea d and interp reted in the
        li ght of th e gra nd and noble vision expres sed
        in th e Pream bl e. In the LIC of Indi a case lS
        (1995) a lso, the Supre me Court again he ld .
        tha t the Prea mble is a n integr al part of the
        Co n st itutio n .
            - Kesavnanda Bharati vs. State of Kerala ( 1973).
            - LIC of India vs. Consum er Education and Research
            Centre ( 1995).

        Like any othe r part of th e Con stituti o n,
        the Prea mbl e was a lso enacte d by the Const ituent Assem bly; but, after th e rest of the
        Const itution was a lready enacted. Th e rea so n
        for insert ing the Pream ble at the e nd was to
        en sure that it was in confo rmity with the
        Co nstitu tio n as adopt ed by the Const ituent
        Assem bly. While forwa rding the Pream ble
        for votes, the Presi de nt of the Co nstitu ent
        Assem bl y said, 'Th e questi on is that Pream ble
        sta nds part of the Con stituti on,19. The motio n
        was t hen adopte d. Hence, the curre nt o pinio n
        h eld by the Supre me Court that the Prea mbl e
        is a part of the Const itution , is in conso nance
        with the opinio n of the found ing father s of
        the Con stituti on.
        - Re ference by the Preside nt of India (1960)
            under Article 143 of the Constitution on the implementat ion of the Ind~Pakistan agreem ent of 1958.
            relating to Berubari union and exchan ge of enclaves.
        - LIC of India vs. Consum er Education and Research Centre ( 1995).
        However, two things should be noted:
            1. Th e Pream ble is neithe r a source of power
            to legisla ture nor a prohib ition upon the
            powe rs of legisla ture.
            2 . It is non-ju sticiab le. that is, its provis io ns
            are not enforc eable in courts of law.


    AMENDABILITY OF THE PREAMBLE
        The question as to whether the Preamble can
        be amended under Article 368 of the Co nsti·
        tution arose for the first time in the hi sto ri c
        Kesovo l1ol1da BlwraN case (1973). Jt was urged
        that the Preamble cannot be amended as it
        is not a part of the Constitution. The peti·
        tioner contended that the amending power
        in Article 368 cannot be used to destroy or
        damage the basic e le m ents or the fundam en·
        tal features of the Co nstitution, which are
        enshrined in the Preamble.

        The Supreme Co urt, howeve r, held that the
        Preamble is a part of the Con sti tution . The
        Court stated that the opinion tendered by it
        in t he Berubari Uniol1 (1960) in this regard
        was wrong, and he ld that the Preamble can
        be amended, subject to the condition that no
        amendment is done to the 'ba s ic features'.

        In other words, t he Co urt held that the basic
        elements or the fundamental features of the
        Co nstitutio n as conta ined in the Preamble
        Cannot be altered by an amendment under
        Article 368. The Court observed, 'The edifice
        of our Constitutio n is based upon the basic
        elements mentioned in the Preamb le. If any of
        these elements are removed, the st ru cture will
        not survive and it will not be th e sa me Consti·
        tution or it ca nnot maintain its identilY. An
        amending power ca nn ot be interpreted so as to
        confer power on the Parliament to take away
        any of These fundamenta l a nd basic character·
        istics of the polity'.

        The Preamble has been amended only once
        so far, in 1976, by the 42nd Co nstitutional
        Amendment Act, which has added three new
        wordS-Social ist, Secu lar and Integrity-to
        the Preamble. This amendment was held to
        be valid.


CHAPTER 6: Union and Its Territory

    Artides 1 to 4 under Part-I ?f the CO,nstitution dea l with the Umon and Its
    territory.

    UNION OF STATES

        Article 1 describes India, that is, Bharat as a
        'Union of States' rather than a 'Federation of
        States', This provision deals with two things: one,
        name of the country; and two, type of polity.

        There was no unanimity in the Constituent Assembly with regard to the name of
        the country. Some members suggested the
        traditional name (Bharat), while other advocated the modern name (India). Hence, the
        Constituent Assembly had to adopt a mix of
        both (,India, that is, Bharat')

        Secondly, the country is described as
        'Union' although its Constitution is federal
        in structure. According to Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the phrase 'Union of States' has been
        preferred to 'Federation of States' for two
        reasons: one, the ~ndian Federation is not
        the result of an agreement among the states
        like the American Federation; and two, the
        states have no right to secede from the federation. The federation is a Union because it
        is indestructible. The country is an integral
        whole and divided into different states only
        for the convenience of administration.

        According to Article 1, the territory of
        India can be classified into three categories:
            1. Territories of the states
            2. Union territories
            3. Territories that may be acquired by the
            Government of India at any time.

        The names of states and union territories
        and their territorial extent are mentioned
        in the first schedule of the Constitution. At
        present, there are 28 states and 8 union territories. The provisions of the Constitution
        pertaining to the states are applicable to all
        the states in the same manner. However, the
        special provisions (under Part XXI) appli.
        cable to the States of Maharashtra, Gujarat,
        Nagaland, Assam, Manipur, Andhra Pradesh,
        Telangana, Sikkim, Mizoram, Arunanchal
        Pradesh, Goa and Karnataka override the
        general provisions relating to the states as a
        class. Further, the Fifth and Sixth Schedules
        contain separate provisions with respect to
        the administration of schedu led areas and
        tribal areas within the states.
            - Til1 2019, the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir
            enjoyed a special position by virtue of Article 370
            of the Indian Constitution. It had its own separate
            State Constitution.

        Notably, the 'Territory of India' is a
        wider expression than the 'Union of India'
        because the latter includes only states while
        the former includes not only the states, but
        also union territories and territories that
        may be acquired by the Government of
        India at any future time. The states are the
        members of the federa l system and share
        a distribution of powers with the Centre.
        The union territories and the acquired
        territories, on the other hand, are directly
        administered by the Central government.

        Being a sovereign state, India can acquire
        foreign territories according to the modes
        recognised by international law, Le., cession
        (following treaty, purcha se, gift, leilse or plebiscite), occupation ( hi th erto unoccupied by a
        recogn ised ruler), conquest or su bjugation.
        For example, India acquired severa l foreign
        territories such as Dadra and Nagar Have1i;
        Goa, Daman and Diu ; Puducherry; and Sikkim since the co mmencem en t of the Constitution. The acqui s ition of these territori es is
        discussed later in this chapter.

        Article 2 empowers t h e Parliament to
        'admit into the Union of India , or estab li sh,
        new stat es on suc h terms and con ditions as
        it thinks fit '. Thus, Articl e "2 gra n ts two powers to the Pa rli ament: (a) the power to admit
        into the Union of India n ew states; and (b)
        the power to esta bli sh new states. The first
        refers to the admission of swtes which arc
        already in existence, while the seco nd refers
        to the establishment of states which were not
        in existence before. Notably, Article 2 re lates
        to the admission or estab l ishment of n ew
        sta tes that are nOl part of the Union of India .
        Article 3, on the other hand, relates to the
        formation of or changes in the existing states
        of t he Union of Indi a. In othe r words, Article
        3 dea ls with the int erna l re-adjust ment infer
        sc of the tcrritor ies of t he constitue nt states
        of the Un ion of India.

    PARLIAMENT' S POWER TO REORGANISE THE STATES
        Article 3 authorises the Parliament to:
            (a) form a new state by separation of territory from any Slate or by un iting two or
            more states or parts of states or by uniting any territory to i.\ part of any state;
            (b) in crease the area of any sta te ;
            (c) diminish the area of any state;
            (d) a lter the boundaries of <I ny state; and
            (e) a lter the name of any state.

        However, Art icle 3 lays down two cnnd itions in t hi s regard: one, a bill co ntemplating the above changes can be introduced in
        the Parliament only with the prior recommendation of the President; Hnd two, before
        recommending the bill, the President has
        to refer the sa me to the sta te legislat ure
        co ncerned ror expressing its views within a
        specified period.

        Further, the power of Parliament to form
        new states includes the powe r to form a new
        state or union te rritory by uniting a part of
        any stale or union territory to any oth er state
        or union territory.
            - Added by the 18th Constitutional Amendment Act of 1966

        The Pres ident (or Parliament) is not bound
        by the views of the sta te leg isi<lture and ma y
        eit her accept or reject them, even if the views
        are received in timc. Further, it is not necessary to make a fresh reference to the state
        legislature every time an amcndment to the
        bill is moved and accepted in Parli<ll1lent'l. [n
        case of a un ion territory, no refercnce need be
        made to the conccrned legislature to ascertain
        its views and the Parliam ent ca n itse lf take
        any action as it deems fit.
            - Bombay vs state of Bombay (1959)

        It is, thu s, clear that the Co nst itution authori ses the Parliament to form new states or
        alter the areas, boundaries or nilm es of the
        ex isting states without their consent. In other
        words, the Parliament ca n redraw the political
        map of India according to its wil l. Hen cc, the
        territor ia l integrity or co ntinu ed existence of
        any state is not guaranteed by the Const itution. There fore, Indi a is rightly described as
        'an indestructible union of destructible states'.
        Th e Union Government can destroy the sta tes
        whereas the state governments cannot destroy
        the Union. In USA, on the other ha nd , the
        territorial integrity or continued existence of
        a state is gU<lfanteed by th e Co nstitution. The
        American Federal Government cannot form
        new states or alter the borders of ex isting states
        without the consent of the states co ncerned.
        That is why the USA is described as 'a n indestructible union of indestru ctible states.'
        j'vloreover, the Constitution (Article 4) itself
        declares that laws made for admission or
        establishment of new states (LI nder Article 2)
        and format ion of new states and alteration o f
        areas, boundaries or names of existing states
        (under Articles 3) arc not to be co n side red
        as amendments of the Constitution under
        Article 368. This mea ns that such laws ca n
        be passed by a simple majority and by the
        ordinary legislative process.

        Does the power of Parliament to diminish
        the areas of a state (u nder Article 3) include
        also the power to cede Indian territory to a
        foreign country? This questi on ca me up for
        examination before the Supreme Court in a
        reference made by the President in 1960. The
        decision of the Ce ntral Government to cede
        part of a territory known as Berubari Union
        (West Bengal) to Pakistan led to po liti ca l agitation and controversy and thereby necessitated the Presidential reference. The Supreme
        Co urt h eld that the power of Parliament to
        diminish the area of a state (under Article 3)
        does not cover cess ion of Indian territory to a
        foreign country. Hence, Indian territory can
        be ceded to a foreign state only by amending
        the Constitution under Article 368. Consequently, the 9th Co n st itutional Amendment
        Act (1960) was enacted to transfer the said
        territory to Pakistan.

        On the other hand, the Supreme Co urt in
        1969 ruled that, se ttlement of a boundary
        dispute between India and a nother cou ntry
        does not require a constitutiona l amendment.
        1t ca n b e done by execut ive action as it does
        not involve cession of Indian territory to a
        foreign cou ntry.

        The various laws made by the Parliament
        under Article 3 are mention ed in Table 6.4.

    EXCHANGE OF TERRITORIES WITH BANGLADESH
        The 100th Co nstitutional Amendment Act
        (2015) was enacted to give effect to the acquiring of certain territories by India and transfer
        of certa in other territories to Bangladesh in
        pursuance of the agreement and its protocol entered into between the Governments
        of India a nd Bangladesh. Under this deal,
        India transferred ]]] enclaves to Bangladesh,
        whil e Bangladesh transferred 51 enclave s
        to India. In addition, the deal also involved
        the transfer of adverse possession s and the
        demarcation of a 6.1 km undemarcated border stretch. For these three purposes, the
        a mendment modifi ed the provisions relating
        to the territories of four states (Assam, West
        Bengal, Meghalaya and TTipura) in the First
        Schedule of the Const itution. The background
        of this amendment is as follows:

            1. India and Bangladesh have a common
            land boundary of approximately 4096.7
            kms. The India-East Pakista n land boundary was determined as per the Radcliffe
            Award of 1947. Disputes arose out of
            so me provisions in the Radcliffe Award,
            which were sought to be resolved through
            the Bagge Award of 1950. Another effort
            was made to settle these di sputes by
            the Ne hru -Noo n Agreement of 1958.
            However, the issue relating to divisior:t of
            Berubari Union was challenged before
            th e Supreme Court. 1b comply with the
            opinion rendered by the Suprem e Cou rt,
            the Con stitution (9th Amendment) Act,
            1960 was passed by the Parliament. Due
            to the continuous litigation and other
            political developments at that time, the
            Consti tution (9th Amendment) Act, 1960
            could not be notified in respect of territories in former East Pakistan (prese ntly
            Bangladesh).
                - This information is downloaded from the website
                of Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative
                Department), Gove rnment of India.

            2. On May 16, 1974, the Agreement between
            India and Bangladesh co n cern ing the
            dema rcation of the land boundary and
            related matters was signed between both
            the countries to find a solution to the
            complex nature of the border demarcation
            involved. This Agreement was not ratified as it involved, inter alia, transfer of
            territory which requires a Constitutional
            Amendment. In this connection, it was
            also required to identify the precise area
            on the ground which would be transferred. Subsequently, the issues relating to
            demarcation of un-demarcated boundary;
            the territori es in adverse posseSSion; and
            exc hange of encl aves were identified and
            resolved by sign ing a Protocol on Septe mbe r 6,2011 , wh ich forms an integra l pa rt
            of the La nd Boundary Agrcementbetween
            Ind ia and Bangladesh, 1974. The Protoco l
            was prepared with support and co ncurre nce ofthe concerned state governme nts
            of Assam, MeghaJaya, Th pu ra and West
            Bengal.

    EVOLUTION OF STATES AND UNION TERRITORIES

        Integration of Princely States

            At the ti me of independence, Indi a com prised
            two catego ries of politiwll units, namely, the
            British p rovi nces ( under t he direct rule of
            British gove rnment) and the princely states
            ( under the rule of nati ve prin ces but subj ec t
            to the para mountcy of t he British Crown ).
            The Indian Indepe nde nce Act ( 1947) created
            two independent and sepa ra te dominions of
            India a nd Pakistan and gave th ree options to
            the pri ncely states viz., joining India , joi nin g
            PakisWn or rema.ining independen t. Of the 552
            prin ce ly states s in lated within the geographical boundaries of In d ia,549 jo in ed India and
            the rema llllllg 3 (Hyde rabad, Junaga rh and
            Kashmir) refu sed to join India. However, in
            co urse of time, they were al so in tegrated w1th
            India - Hyderabacl by mean s of poli ce action,
            Junagarh by means of referendum and K;lshmir by t he In strume nt of Accession .

            In 1950, t h e Const itu tion co nta in e d a
            four-fold classificatio n of t h e stat es and
            territories of the Indian Union- Part A, Part Ii
            .:lnd Part C sta tes a nd Part D territories. In a1l,
            they numbe red 29. Part A states co mpr ised
            n in e e rstwh ile governor's provi nces of Bri tish
            India. Part B sta tes consisted of nine erstwhi1e
            prin cely states wit h leg islatures. Part C states
            cons isted of erstwhile chief comm issione r's
            provi nces of British India and some of th e
            erstwhil e prin ce ly states. These Part C stales
            ( in all 10 in number) we re ce ntrall y administered. Th e Anda ma n a nd Nicobar Islands
            were kept as th e sol ita ry Pa rt 0 territories.

            Th is four-fo ld classi fi catio n of the states
            a nd ter ritories ( 1950) is give n in Thbl e 6.1.

        Dhar Commission and JVP Committee
            T he integration of princely states with the
            rest of India has purely an ad hoc arrangemen t. 
            There has bee n a de ma nd fro m different
            regions, particularly South India, for reorgan·
            isation of states on linguistic basis. Accord·
            ingly, in June 1948, the Government of India
            appointed the Linguistic Provinces Commi,s..
            sion under the chairmanship of S.K. Dhar to
            examine the feasibility of this. The commi,s..
            sion submitted its report in December, 1948,
            and recommended the reorganisation of states
            on the basis of administrative convenience
            rather than linguistic factor. This created much
            resentment and led to the appointment of
            another Linguistic Provinces Committee by the
            Congress in December, 1948, itself to examine
            the whole question afresh. It consisted of Jawa·
            harlal Nehru, Vallahbhai Patel and Pattabhi
            Sitaramayya and hence, was popularly known
            as the JVp Committee. It had no chainnan or
            convenor. It submitted its report in April, 1949,
            and fonnally rejected language as the basis for
            reorganisation of states.
            However, in October, 1953, the Government of India was forced to create the first
            linguistic state, known as Andhra state,
            by separating the Thlugu speaking areas from
            the Madras state. This followed a prolonged
            popular agitation and the death of Potti Sri·
            ramulu, a Congress person of standing, after
            a 56·day hunger strike for the cause.

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 6 .1 Territory of India In 1950
States In Part A

States In Part B

1. Assam

1. Hyderabad

1. AJmer

2. Bihar

2. Jammu and Kashmir

2. Bhopal

3. Bombay

3. Madhya Bharat

3. Bltaspur

4. Madhya Pradesh

4. Mysore

4. Coach-Behar

5. Madras

5. PaUala and East Punjab

5. Coorg

6. Orissa

6. Rajasthan

6. Deihl

7. Punjab

7. Saurashtra

7. Himachal Pradesh

8. United Provinces

8. Travancore-Cochin

8. Kutch

9. West Bengal

9. Vlndhya Pradesh

9. Manlpur

States In Part C

10. Tripura

TerritOries In Part 0

1. Andaman and Nicobar Islands
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

        Fuzl Ali Commission

            The creation of Andhra state intensified the
            demand from other regions for creation of
            states on linguistic basis. This forced the Gov·
            ernment of India to appoint (in December,
            1953) a three·member States Reorganisation
            Commission under the chainnanship of Fazl Ali
            to re-examine the whole question. Its other two
            members were K.M. Panikkar and H.N. Kunzru.
            It submitted its report in September 1955 and
            broadly accepted language as the basis of reor·
            ganisation of states. But, it rejected the theory
            of 'one language-one state'. Its view was that the
            unity of I.ndia should be regarded as the primary
            consideration in any redrawing of the country's
            political units. It identified four major factors
            that can be taken into account in any scheme
            of reorganisation of states:

                (a) Preservation and strengthening of the
                unity and security of the country.
                (b) Linguistic and cultural homogeneity.
                (c) Financial, economic and administrative
                considerations.
                (d) Planning and promotion of the welfare
                of the people in each state as well as of
                the nation as a whole.

            The commission suggested the abolition
            of the four·fold classification of states and
            territories under the original Constitution
            and creation of 16 states and 3 centrally
            administered territories. The Government
            of Indi a accepted these recommendations
            with certain minor modifications. By the
            States Reorganisation Act (1956) and the
            7th Constitutional Amendment Act (1956),
            the distinction between Part A and Part B
            states was done away with and Part C states
            were abolished. Some of them were merged
            with adjacent states and some other were
            designated as union territories. As a result,
            14 states and 6 union territories were created
            on November 1, 1956. These are mentioned
            in Thble 6.2.

            The States Reo rganisat ion Act (1956) estab·
            li shed the new state of Kerala by merging the
            Travancore - Cochin State with the Malabar
            Distri ct of Madras sta te and Ka sargod e of
            So uth Ca nara ( Dakshina Kannada). It merged
            the Telugu-speaking areas of Hyde rabad sta te
            with the Andhra state to crea te the Andhra
            Pradesh sta te. Further, it merged the Madya
            Bharat sta te, Vindya Pradesh state a nd Bhopal
            state into the Madya Pradesh state. Sim il a rl y,
            it merged the Sa ura shtra state a nd Kutch state
            into that of the Bombay state, the Coorg state
            into that of Mysore state; the Pat ia la a nd East
            Punjab States Union ( Pepsu) in to th at of
            Punjab state; and th e Ajmer state into th at
            of Rajastan state. Moreover, it created the new
            union te rritory of Laccadive, Minicoy and
            Amindjvi Isla nd s from the territory detached
            fro m the Madras sta te.

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 6.2

Territory of India in 1956

States

\

UnIon Terntorl es

,. Andra Pradesh

1. Andaman and Nlcobar
Islands

2. Assam

2. Delhi

3. Bihar

3. Himachal Pradesh

4. Bombay

4. Laccadive. Minicoy and
Amindivl Islands

5. Jammu and Kashmir

5. Manlpur

6. Kerala

6. Trlpura


7. Madhya Pradesh
8. Madras
9. Mysore
10. Orissa
11 . Punjab
12. Rajasthan
13. Uttar Pradesh
14. West Bengal
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------


        New States and Union Territories Created After 1956
            Eve n after the la rge·scale reorgani sat ion of
            the states in 1956, the po lit ica l map of India
            u nd erwe nt con tinuou s cha nges du e to the
            pressure of popu lar agitations and po liti ca l
            cond ition s. The demand for the creation of
            so me more sL.1tes on the basis of language or
            cu ltura l ho mogeneity resu lted in the bifurcation of exist ing states.

            Maharashtra and Gu;arat 
            In 1960, the bilingual sta te of Bombay was divided5 into two separate states-Ma hara shtra for Ma rath i-speaking
            p eop le and Gujarat for Gujarati-speaking
            peo ple. Gujara t was established as the 15th sta te
            of the Indian Union.
                - By lhe Bombay ReorganiS<ll ion Act, 1960.

            Dadra and Nagar Haveli Th e Portuguese
            ru led this territory until its liberat ion in
            1954. Su bsequ entl y, the adm inistration was
            carried on till 1961 by an administrator
            chose n by th e peo ple them se lves. It was co nverted into a un ion territory of Ind ia by the
            10th Co nstitutiona l Ame ndme n t Act, 1961.
            Later, in 202 0, this union territory was
            me rged with the union territory of Da man
            and Diu in orde r to form a new union territory of Dadra and N<lga r Havcli and Da man
            and Diu. This was don e by the Dad ra a nd
            Nagar Have li a nd Daman and Diu (Merger of
            Union Thr ritori es) Act, 2019.

            Goa, Dama n and Diu Indi a acquired these
            th ree terr ito r ies from th e Port ugu ese by
            mean s o f a po lice act io n in 1961. They were
            co nst it uted as a un ion territory by th e 12th
            Co nst itut iona l Amend me nt Act, 1962. Later,
            in 198 7, Goa wa s conferred a sta tehood. 6
            Co nsequ en tly, Daman and Diu was made a
            se pa rate uni o n te rri to ry.
            Again, in 2020, the union ter ri to ry of
            Da man and Diu was merged with the union
            territo ry of Dadra a nd Nagar Haveli in orde r to
            form a new u ni on te rritory of Dadra and Nagar
            Haveli and Daman and Diu. This was do ne by
            th e Dadra a nd Naga r Haveli and Daman and
            Diu (Merge r of Unio n 'Territori es) Act, 2019.
                - By the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorgmlisation Act, 1987.

            Pudu cherr y The territo ry of Pudu ch erry
            co mpri ses the former French estab lishm ents
            in Ind ia kn own as Pud ucherry, Karaika l,
            Mahe and Ya na m . The French handed over
            this territory to Ind ia in 1954. Subseq uen tly,
            it was administered as an 'acquired territory ',
            till 1962 whe n it was made a union territory
            by the 14th Constitutiona l Amendment Act.

            Nagaland In 1963, th e State of Naga land was
            fonned' by taking the Naga Hills and Thensang
            area out of the state of Assa m. This was done
            to satisfy th e move ment of th e hostile Nagas.
            Howeve r, before givin g Naga land the status
            of th e 16th SL:1te of the Indian Un ion , it was
            placed under the co ntrol of the governor of
            Assam in 1961.
                - By theSwte of Naga iand Act, 1962, with effect from
                Dece mbe r 1, 1963.

            Haryana, Cha nd izarh and H imachal Pradesh
            In 1966, th e State of Punja b was bifurcated 6 to
            create Haryana, the 17th state of the Indian
            Union, and the union territory of Chandigarh.
            This fonowed the demand for a separate 'Sikh
            Homeland' (Punjabi Subha) raised by the
            AkaH Dal under the leadership of Master TIna
            Singh. On the recommendation of the Shah
            Commission (1966), the Punjabi-speaking
            areas were constituted into the unilingual
            state of Punjab, the Hindi-speaking areas were
            constituted into the State of Haryana and the
            hiB areas were merged with the adjoining
            union territory of Himachal Pradesh. In 1971,
            the union territory of Himachal Pradesh was
            elevated9 to the status of a state (18th state of
            the Indian Union).
                - By Punjab Reorgn nisation Act, 1966.
                - By the State of Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970, with
                effect from January 25, 197L

            Manipur, Tripura and Meghataya In 1972, the
            political map of Northeast India underwent
            a major change.1O Thus, the two union territories of Manipur and Tripura and the substate of Meghalaya got statehood and the two
            union territories of Mizoram and Arunachal
            Pradesh (originally known as North-East
            Frontier Agency-NEFA) came into being.
            With this, the number of states of the Indian
            Union increased to 21 (Manipur 19th, Tripura
            20th and Meghalaya 21st). Initially, the 22nd
            Constitutional Amendment Act (1969) created
            Meghalaya as an 'autonomous state' or 'substate' within the state of Assam with its own
            legislature and council of ministers. However,
            this did not satisfy the aspirations of the
            people of Meghalaya. The union territories
            of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh were also
            formed out of the territories of Assam.
                - By the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act,
                1971, with effect from January 21, 1972.

            Sikkim Till 1947, Sikkim was an Indian
            princely state ruled by Chogyal. In 1947,
            after the lapse of British paramountcy,
            Sikkim became a 'protectorate' of India,
            whereby the Indian Government assumed
            responsibility for the defence, external
            affairs and communications of Sikkim. In
            1974, Sikkim expressed its desire for greater
            association with India. Accordingly, the
            35th Constitutional Amendment Act (1974)
            was enacted by the parliament. This amendment introduced a new class of statehood
            under the constitution by conferring on
            Sikkim the status of an 'associate state' of
            the Indian Union. For this purpose, a new
            Article 2-A and a new schedule (10th Schedule
            containing the terms and conditions of association) were inserted in the Constitution.
            This experiment, howe,:,er, did not last long
            as it could not fully satisfy the aspirations of
            the people of Sikkim. In a referendum held
            in 1975, they voted for the abolition of the
            institution of Chogyal and Sikkim becoming
            an integral part of India. Consequently, the
            36th Constitutional Amendment Act (1975)
            was enacted to make Sikkim a full-fledged
            state of the Indian Union (the 22nd state).
            This amendment amended the First and the
            Fourth Schedules to· the Constitution and
            added. a new Article 371-F to provide for certain special provisions with respect to the
            administration of Sikkim. It also repealed
            Article 2-A and the 10th Schedule .that were
            added by the 35th Amendment Act of 1974.

            Mizoram , Arunachal Pradesh and Goa In
            1987, three new States of Mizoram 11,
            Arunachal Pradesh l 2 and Goai3 came into
            being as the 23rd, 24th and 25th states .o f the
            Indian Union respectively. The union territory of Mizoram was conferred the status
            of a full state as a sequel to the signing of a
            memorandum of settlement (Mizoram Peace
            Accord) in 1986 between the Central govern·
            ment and the Mizo National Front, ending
            the two-decade-old insurgency. Arunachal
            Pradesh had also been a union territory from
            1972. The State of Goa was created by separating the territory ' of Goa from the Union
            Thrritory of Goa, Daman and Diu.
                - By the State ofMizoram Act, 1986, with effect from
                February 20,1987.
                - By the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986, with
                effect from February 20, 1987.
                - By the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987.

            Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand and Jharkhand In
            2000, th ree mo re new States of Chh attisga rh 14,
            Utta ra khand l 5 a nd Jh arkha nd l6 we re c rea ted
            out of t he territo rie s of Mad hya Prad esh ,
            Utta r Pra des h an d Bi har, respecti vely. Th ese
            beca me th e 26t h , 27th a nd 28t h sta tes of t he
            India n Un ion , res pectivel y.
                - By the Madhya Pradesh Reorgani sation Au, 2000.
                - By the Utta r Pradesh Reo rga ni sat ion Act, 2000 .
                - By the Biha r Reorganisatio n Act, 2000.

            Telangana In 2014, the ncw stHte ofThlanga na
            cam e into cx iste nce as the 29th state of t he
            Ind ian Un io n . It wa s ca rved out of t he territo ries of And h ra Pradesh .

            The Andh ra SL:'1te Act (1953) form ed the first
            li nguistic state of India , known as the state of
            An dh ra, by taking out th e Thlugu speaking area s
            from th e State of Madras (now Th m il Nadu) .
            Kurnool was the capital of An dhra state a nd the
            state h igh court was esta blished a t Gu ntur.
            The Stat es Reo rgan isa ti o n Ac t ( J95 6)
            me rged the Tc lug u-spea ki ng area s of Hyderabad state with the Andhra state to crea te th e
            e nlarged Andhra Prad esh sta te. Th e ca p ital of
            the state wa s sh ifted to Hyde ra bad.
            Aga in, th e Andhra Pradesh Reo rga n isation
            Act (2014 ) bi fu rcated t he And hra Pra desh
            into two separate states, nam e ly, t he And h ra
            Pra desh (re sidu a ry) a nd the Thlanga na.

            Jammu &- Kashmir and Ladakh Till 2019,
            th e e rstwhile State of Ja m mu a n d Ka shm ir
            had its own con stit utio n an d thu s e njoyed a
            specia l stat us by virtu e of Article 370 of the
            Con stitution of Ind ia. [n 2019, t hi s spec ial
            status was aboli shed by a p res ide nt ial order
            known a s ~T h e Con stitu ti o n (App li catio n
            to J a m mu a nd Kashmir) Ord er, 20l9~. T h is
            orde r superseded the earl ier orde r kn own as
            "T he Con stitu tion (Ap pli ca tio n to J a m m u
            a nd Ka shmir) Order, 1954". Th e 2019 ord e r
            extended a ll the provision s of the Co nstitution
            o f Indi a to J am m u a nd Ka shm ir al so.

            Further, th e J a m m u a nd Ka sh mir Reorga ni sation Ac t, 2019, 
            bifu rcated the erstwhi le Sta te of Jamm u a nd Ka shmi r in to two
            separate union territories, namely, the union
            territory of Jammu and Kashmir and the
            union territory of Ladakh.
            The union territory of Jammu and Kashmir comprises all the districts of the erstwhile
            State of Jammu and Kashmir except the KaTgil and Leh districts wh ich have gone to the
            union territory of Ladakh.
            Thu s, the number of states and union territories increased from 14 and 6 in 1956 to 28
            and 8 (as of now), respectively. This present
            position is indicated in Table 6.3.

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 6.3

Territory of India (as of now)

Stat es

Unron Territ orr es

1. Andhra Pradesh

1. Andaman and Nicobar
Islands

2. Arunachal Pradesh

2. Chandigarh

3. Assam

3. Dadra and Nagar
Havel[ and Daman
and Diu

4. Bihar

4. Delhi (National Capital
Territory)

5. Chhattisgarh

5. Jammu and Kashmir

6. Goa

6. Ladakh

7. Gujarat

7. lakshadweep

8. Haryana

8. Puducherry

9. Himachal Pradesh
10. Jharkhand
11. Karnataka
12. Kerala
13. Madhya Pradesh
14. Maharashtra
15. Manipur
16. Meghalaya
17. Mlzoram
18. Nagaland
19. Odisha
20. Punjab
2 1. Rajasthan
22. Sikkim
23. Tamil Nadu
24. Telangana
25. Tripura
26. Uttarakhand
27. Uttar Pradesh
28. West Bengal
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------


        Change of Names The names of some states
        and union territories have also been changed.

        The United Provinces was the first state to have
        a new name. It was renamed 'Uttar Pradesh'
        in 1950. In 1969, Madras was renamed l7
        'Tamil Nadu'. Similarly, in 1973, Mysore was
        r enamed 18 'Karnataka'. In the sa me year,
        Laccadive, Minicoy and Arnindivi Islands were
        renarned 19 'Lakshadweep'. In 1992, the Union
        Thrritory of Delhi was redesignated as the
        National Capital Thrritory of Delhi (without
        being conferred the status of a full-fledged
        state) by th e 69th Constitutional Amendment
        Act, ]991. In 2006, Uttaranchal was renamed 20
        as 'Uttar<l;khand'. In the sa me year, Pondicherry
        was renamed21 as 'Puducherry'. In 2011, Orissa
        was renamed 22 as 'Odisha'.
            By the Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968, with effect from January 14,1969.
            By the Mysore State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1973.
            By the Laccadive, Minicay and Amindivi Islands (Alteration of Na me) Act, 1973.
            By the Uttaranchal (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006.
            By the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006.
            By the Orissa (Altera tion of Name) Act, 2011.

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------        
        Table 6.4

71'
I

(,

,,

I:

~ 57


Laws Made by Parliament Under Article 3 of the Constitution

51 No

Acts

PrOVISionS

1.

Assam (Alteration of Boundaries) Act.
1951

Altered the boundaries of the State of Assam by ceding a
strip of territory comprised in that State to Bhutan.

2.

Andhra State Act, 1953

Formed the first linguistic stete, known as the State of
Andhra, by taking out the Telugu speaking areas from the
State of Madras. Kuroool was the capital of Andhra State
and the state high court was established at Guntur.

3

Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New
State) Act, 1954

Formed the new state of Himachal Pradesh by uniting the
existing States of Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur.

4.

Chanderoagore (Merger) Act, 1954

Merged the territory of Chandernagore
(a former enclave of French India) Into the State of West
Bengal.

5.

States Reorganisation Act. 1956

Made the extensive changes in the boundaries of various
states for the purpose of meeting the linguistic, regional
and local demands. It created 14 states and 6 union territories. The States were: Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar.
Bombay, Jammu and Kashmir. Kerala, Madhya Pradesh.
Madras, Mysore. Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh
and West Bengal. The Union Territories were: Andaman
and Nlcobar Islands, Deihl, Himachal Pradesh. laccadive,
Minicoy and Amindivi Islands. Manipur and Trlpura. It estab·
lished the new state of Kerala by merging the Travancore·
eochin State with the Malabar district of Madras State and
the Kasargode of South Canara (Dakshina Kannada).

51 No

Acts

ProvIsions
It merged the Telugu-speaking areas of Hyderabad State
with the Andhra State to create the Andhra Pradesh State.
Further, it merged the Madhya Bharat State, Vlndhya
Pradesh State and Bhopal State into the Madhya Pradesh
State. Similarly, it merged the Saurashtra State and Kutch
State into that of the Bombay State; the Coorg State into
that of Mysore State; the Pallala and East Punjab States
Union (PEPSUJ Into that of Punjab State; and the Ajmer
State into that of Rajasthan State. Moreover, it created the
new union terri tory of Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindlvi
Islands from the territory detached from the Madras State.

6.

Blhal and West Bengal (Transfer of
Terrltortes) Act, 1956

Provided for the transfer of certain territories from the State
of Bihar to the State of West Bengal.

7.

Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh
(Transfer of Territori es) Act, 1959

Provided for the transfer of certain terri tories from the State
of Rajasthan to the State of Madhya Pradesh.

Andhra Pnldesh and Madras (AlteraUon

Provided for the alteration of boundaries of the Steles of
Andhra Pradesh and Madras.

9.

Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960

Formed the new State of Gujarat (15th state) by taking
out the GuJaratl speaking areas from the state of Bombay
and renamed the other part of the Bombay State as
Maharashtra State. The city of Ahmedabad was made the
capital of Gujarat.

10.

Acquired Terrttories (Merger) Act. 1960

Provided for the merger Into the States of Assam, Punjab
and West Bengal of Certain te"ltories acquired from
PlIklStan under the agreements entered Into between the
Governments of India and Pakistan, In 1958 and 1959.

11.

State of Nagaland Act, 1962

Formed the new State of Nagaland (16th state) by taking out
the Naga Hills - Tuensang Area from the State of Assam.
The Naga Hills - Tuensang Area was a tribal area of Assam
specified in the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution.

12.

Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966

13.

Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of
Boundaries) Act, 1968

Provided for the alteration of boundaries of the States of
Bihar and Uttar Pradesh .

14.

Andhra Pradesh and Mysole (Transfer of
Terrftoly) Act. 1968

of Mysore to the State of Andhra Pradesh.

15.

Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act,
1968

Changed the name of the State of Madras to that of State
of Tamil Nadu.

16.

Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act.

Formed an autonomous state (Sub-state) known 85
Meghalaya. wtthln the State of Assam.

17.

State of Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970

8.

of Boundorles) Ad, 1959

,

1969

Formed the new State of Haryana (17th state) by taking out
the Hindi speaking areas from the State of Punjab. It also
made Chandlgarh 8 new Union Terrttory as well 8S a common capital for both PunJ8b and Haryana.

Provided for the transfer of certain territory from the State

Elevated the Union Territory of Himachal Pradesh to the
status of a state (18th state).

Acts

PrOVIsions

Nbl1h-e'aStern Afeas (Reorganisation)

Elevated the two Union Territories of Manipur and Tnpura to
the status of states (19th state and 20th state respectively), It
also conferred full statehood on Meghalaya (21st state). which
was previously a sub-state within the State of Assam. Further,
It formed the two Union Territories of Miloram and Arunachal
Pradesh out of the territories of Assam.

Mysore State (Alteration of Nane) Act,
1973

Changed the name of the state of Mysore to that of the
State of Karnataka .

laccadive, Mlnlcoy and Amlndivi Isl:mds
(Alteration of Name) Act, 1973

Changed t he name of the Union Territory of the Laccad ive.
Minicoy and Amlndivi Islands to that of t he Unio n Territory
of Lakshadweep.

Haryana and Uttar Pradesh
(Alteration of Boundaries) Ac t, 1979

Provided for the alteration of boundaries of the States of
Ha ryana and Uttar Pradesh.

2].

State of Mlzoram Act, 1986

Elevated the Union Territory of Miloram to the status of a
state (23rd state).

23

State of A runachal Pradesh
Act, 1986

Elevated the Union Territory of Arunachal Pradesh to the
status of a State (24th state).

24.

Goa. Daman and Diu
Reorganisation Act, 1987

Act, 1971

19

20.

25
26.

Madhya Pradesh Reorganisation
Ac t, 2000

utter Pradesh Reorganisation
Act.~O

Formed the new State of Goa (25th State) by separating
the territory of Goa from t he Union Territory of Goa, Daman
and Diu.
Formed the new state of Chhattisgarh (26th state) out of
the territories of the State of Madhya Pradesh.
Created the new State of Uttaranchal (27th state) by
carving out Its territory from that of the territories
of the state of Uttar Pradesh.

27 .

Bihar Reorganisation Ac t, 2000

Established the new State of Jharkhand (28th state)
by separating its territory from the territories of the
State of Bihar.

28.

Uttaranchal (Alteration of Name) Act,

2006

Changed the name of the State of Unaranchal to that
of t he State of Unarakhand.

Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act,
2006

Renamed the Union Territory of Pondicherry as the
Union Territory of Puducherry.

Orlua (Alteration of Name) Act, 2011

Changed the name of the State of Orissa to that of the
State of Odisha.

A ndhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act,
2014

Formed the new state of Telangana (29th state) by
ca rving out its territory from the territories of the state
of Andhra Pradesh.

Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisat ion Act.

Bifurcated the erstwhile state of Jammu and Kashmir into
two separate Union territories, namely, the Union territory
of Jammu and Kashmir and the Unio n territory of Ladakh.

Oadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman
and Diu (Merger of Union Terri tories)
Act, 2019

Merged the erstwhile two separate union t erritories (The
union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and the union
terri tory of Daman and Diu) in o rder to form a new union
territory of Dadra and Naga r Haveli and Daman and Dilo .

29.

30.
31.

32.

33.

2019

------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------        


------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------        
Table 6.5

Articles Related to Union and its Territory at a Glance

Article No

Subject-matter

,

I

1.

Name and territory of the Union

2.

Admission or establishment of new states

2A.

Sikkim to be associated with the Union-(Repealed)

3.

Formation of new states and alteration of areas, boundaries or names of existing states

4.

Laws made under Articles 2 and 3 to provide for the amendment of the First and the Fourth Schedules

--~--------------

and supplemental, incidental and consequential matters.
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------        


CHAPTER 7: Citizenship

    MEANING AND SIGNIFICANCE

        Like any other modern state, India has two
        kinds of people-citizens and aliens. Citizens
        are fun members of the Indian State and owe
        allegiance to it. They enjoy all civil and po·
        litical rights. Aliens, on the other hand, are
        the citizens of some other state and hence,
        do not enjoy all the civil and political rights.
        They are of two categories-friendly aliens
        or enemy aliens. Friendly aliens are the"
        subjects of those countries that have cordial
        relations with .India. Enemy aliens, on the
        other hand, are the subjects of ~hat country
        that is at war with India. They enjoy lesser
        rights than the friendly aliens, e.g., they
        do not enjoy protection against arrest and
        detention (Article 22).

        The Constitution confers the following
        rights and privileges on the citizens of India
        (and denies the same to aliens):

            1. Right against discrimination on grounds
            of religion, race, caste, sex or place of
            birth (Article 15).

            2. Right to equality of opportunity in the
            matter of public employment (Article 16).

            3. Right to freedom of speech and expression, 
            assembly, ass(wiation, movement,
            residence and profession (Article 19).

            4. Cultural and educational rights (Articles
            29 and 30).

            5. Right to vote in elections to the 10k Sabha
            and state legislative assembly.

            6. Right to contest for the membership of
            the Parliament 'a nd the state legislature.

            7. Eligibility to hold certain public offices,
            that is, President,of India, Vice-President
            of India, judges of the Supreme Court
            and the high courts, Governor of states,
            Attorney General ofIndia and Advocate
            General of states.

        Along with the above rights, the citizens
        also owe certain duties towards the Indian
        State, as for example, paying taxes, respecting the national flag and national anthem,
        defending the coun.try and so on.

        In India, both citizens by birth as well as
        naturalised citizens are eligible for the office
        of President while in USA, only a citizen by
        birth and not a naturalised citizen is eligible
        for the office of President.

    SINGLE CITIZENSHIP

        Though the Indian Constitution is federal and
        envisages a dual polity (Centre and states), it
        provides for only a single citizenship, that is,
        the Indian citizenship. The citizens in India
        owe allegiance only to the Union. There
        is no separate state citizenship. The other
        federal states like USA and Australia, on the
        other hand, adopted the system of double
        citizenship.

        In USA, each person is not only a citizen of
        USA but also of the particular state to which
        he/she belongs. Thus, he/she owes allegiance
        to both and enjoys dual sets of rights-one set
        conferred by the national government and
        another by the state government. This system
        creates the problem of discrimination, that is, a
        state may discriminate in favour of its citizens
        in matters like right to vote, right to hold public
        offices, right to practice professions and so on.

        Th is problem is avo ided in the system of single
        citize nsh ip preva le nt in India.

        In Ind ia, a ll c itize ns irrespect ive of the
        state in whi ch th ey are born or res id e e nj oy
        th e sa me polit ica l a nd c ivi l rights of c iti:len·
        shi p a ll over the coun t ry and no di scrim inatio n is made betwee n th e m . Howeve r, this
        genera l ru le of absence of discri m inatio n is
        subj ect to some exceptio n s, viz,

            1. The Parliame n t ( un de r Art icle 16) ca n
            presc ribe res idence with in a state or
            u n ion terri tory as a cond it ion for ce rta in 
            e m p loyments o r appo intm e n ts
            in t h a t state or uni o n territo ry, or
            l oca l aut h ority or other aut h ority
            with in t ha t state or u n io n terr itory.
            Accordi ng ly, t he Parl ia men t enac ted
            the Public Employment ( Req ui re me nt
            as to Res id ence) Act, 1957, a nd t hereby
            a u thor ised th e Government of in di a
            to p rescri be res ide n t ia l qu a li ficat io n
            on ly for a ppo in t ment to non-Gazetted
            posts i n Andh ra Prades h , Hi mach a l
            Pra desh, Ma nipu r and Tripura. As thi s
            Act expi red in J 974, there is no such
            p rov ision for any state excep t Andh ra
            Pra desh 1 and Thlanga na .
                - By virtue of Article 371-0 inse rted by the 32nd
                Co nstitutio nal Amendment Act, 1973.

                - Article 371D has been extended to the State of
                Thla ngana by the And hra Pradesh Reorga n isation
                Act, 2014.

            2. Th e Co n stitu t io n (u n de r A rti cle 15)
            p rohi bi ts discri m i nati on aga i nst a ny
            citize n on g rou n ds of rel igio n , race,
            caste, sex or place of b irth and n ot o n
            the gro un d of res ide nce. Thi s means that
            t he state can p rovide spec ial be nefi ts
            or g ive prefere nce to its resi dents in
            matte rs th at do not come with in t he
            pu rview of t h e r ight s gi ve n by the
            Const itution to the Indi a n ci t izens. For
            example, a state may offer co ncessio n in
            fees fo r ed ucat ion to its res ide nts.

            3. The freedo m of move ment a nd residence
            (u nder Article 19) is subjected to the
            protect ion of in terests of any schedul e
            tribe. In other words, the right of oll tsiders
            to en ter, reside and settle in tr iba l a reas
            is restricted. Of cou rse, thi s is done to
            protect the disti nctive culture, language,
            customs a nd ma nners of schedule tribes
            and to safegua rd their traditio na l vocation
            a nd property aga inst exp loitation.

            4 . Ti ll 2019, t he leg islatu re of the e rstwhil e 
            sta te of J am mu and Kas h m ir was
            em powered to:
                (a) defin e the persons who are penn anent residents of the state; and
                (b) con fe r a ny specia l rights and privileges o n such permanent res ide nts
                as respects:
                    (i) e m ployment un der the state
                    governm en t;
                    (ii) acquisitio n of im movabl e prope rty in the sta te;
                    (iii) settle ment in the state; a nd
                    (iv) righ t to scholarsh ips a n d such
                    other form s of aid provided by
                    the state gover nme n t.

        The above provis ion was based on Arti cl e
        35-A of the Constit ut ion of Ind ia. Thi s Article
        was in serted i n t he constit utio n by "Th e
        Co n st itut ion (Ap pl icat ion to Jam m u and
        Kashmi r) Order, 1954". Th is order was issued
        by the Preside n t under Article 370 of t he Co nstitution which had provi ded a spec ia l status
        to th e e rstwh ile state of J am m u and Kash m ir.
        i n 2019, thi s spec ia l status was a boli shed by a
        new preside nti a l order k nown as "Th e Co nstit utio n (App li cation to Jamm u and Kashm ir)
        Order, 2019". Th.is orde r su perseded t he ea rli e r
        19540 orde r.
            Further, thc Jamm u and Kash mir Reorgan isation
            Act, 2019, biFurcated the erstwhile State of Jam mu
            and K.:'lshmi r into twO separate Union territories,
            na mely, the Union territory of Jammu & K.'lshm ir
            and the Un ion tc rritory of Ladakh.

        T he Const it ut ion of In dia, li ke that of
        Cana d a, h as in t roduced the syste m of s i l1 glcc itize n sh ip an d prov ided u n ifo rm rig hts
        (except in few cases) fo r t he peop le of Indi a
        to p romo te t h e fee lin g of fraternity an d
        un ity among th e m and to buil d an i nte·
        grated Indi a n nation. Desp ite thi s, India has
        been wi tnessi n g t he commll n a l r iots, class
        co n flicts, caste wa rs, li ng u ist ic clashes an d
        ethnic di sputes. Thus, the cherished goa l of
        the founding fathers and th e Co n stitution
        makers to build an un ited and integrated
        Indian n atio n has not b ee n fully rea lised.

    CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
        The Con stitu tion deals with the citizenship
        from Articles 5 to 11 under Part 11. However, it
        contains neither any permanent nor any elaborate provisions in this regard. It only identifies
        the persons who became citi ze ns of India at its
        commence ment (i.e., on January 26, 1950). It
        does not deal with the probl em of acquisition or
        loss of citizen ship subseque nt to its commencement. It empowers the Parliament to enact a
        law to provide for such matters and any other
        matter relating to citizenship. Accordingly, the
        Parliament has enacted the Citizenship Act
        ( 1955), wh ich has been amended from time
        to time.

        According to the Co nsti tu tion , the following four ca tegories of perso ns beca me the
        citizens of India at its co mmencement i.e.,
        on Janua ry 26 , 1950:

            1. A person who had his/ her domicile in
            India and also fulfilled any one of the
            three conditions, viz., if he/she was born
            in India; or if either of his/ her parents
            was born in India; or if he/she has been
            ordinarily resident in India for five years
            immediately before the commencement of
            theConstitution, became a citizen of India.

            2. A perso n who migrated to India from
            Pakistan became an Indian citizen if hel
            she or either of their parents or any of
            their grandparents wa ~ born in undivided
            India and also fulfilled anyone of the two
            conditions viz., in case hel she migra ted
            to India before July 19, 1948 , he/she had
            been ordinarily resident in India since
            the date of his/ her migration; or in G.:1se
            he/ she migrated to India on or after July
            19, 1948, he/she had been regi~te red as a
            citizen of India. But, a person could be so
            registered only if he/she had been resident
            in India for six months preceding the date
            of his/ her application for registration.
                - On this date, the permit system for such migration
                was introduced.
            3. A perso n who migrated to Pakistan from
            India after March I , 1947, but la ter
            returned to India for resettlement could
            beco me an Indian citizen. For this, he l
            sh e had to be res ident in Indi a for six
            mo nths preceding the date of hi s/ her
            appli cation for registration.
                - This provision refers to migratio n after 1 March,
                1947 but before 26 January, 1950 . The question of
                citizenship of perso ns who migrated after 26 January,
                1950, has to be decided under the provisions of the
                Citizenship Act, 1955.

            4. A perso n who, or any of whose parents
            or gra ndparents, was born in undivided
            India but who is o rdinarily residing
            outside India shall become an India n
            citize n if h e/ sh e has been registered as
            a citize n of India by th e diplom atic or
            con sular representative of India in the
            co untry of his/ h er residence, whether
            before or after the co mmence me nt of
            the Co nstitution . Thus, this provision
            covers the overseas Indians who may
            want to acquire India n citizen ship.

        To sum up, these prov isions deal with the
        citizenship o((a) perso ns domicil ed in India;
        (b) perso ns migrated from Pakistan; (c) persons migrated to Pakista n but later returned;
        and (d) persons of Indi a n origin residing
        outside India.

        The oth er constitutional provisions with
        respect to the citizenship are as foll ows:
            1. No person shall be a citizen of India or be
            deemed to be a citizen of India, if he/
            she has voluntaril y acquired the citize nship of any foreign state.
            2. Every person who is or is deemed to be a
            ci tizen of Iridia shall continue to be such
            citi zen, subject to th e provisions of a ny
            law made by Parliament.
            3. Parli a ment sh all h ave th e power to
            make any provision with respect to the
            acquisition and termination of cit ize nship a nd all other matters relating to
            cit ize nship.

    CITIZENSHIP ACT, 1955
        The Citi ze nship Act ( 1955) provides for acquisition 
        and loss of cit izenship a fter t he comme nce ment of the Constitut ion.

        Orig in ally, t he Citizenship Act ( 1955) a lso
        provided fo r the Commonwealth Citizensh ip.
        But, thi s provi sion was repealed by the Citizenshi p (A me ndment ) Act, 2003.

        Acquisition of Citizenship
            The Citizenship Act of 1955 prescribes five
            wa ys of acqui ri ng cit ize n sh ip, viz, birth ,
            de sce nt , registration , naturali satio n a nd
            in corporation of territory:

                I. By Birth A pe rso n born in India on or
                after J a nuary 26, 1950 but before July 1, 1987
                is a cit ize n of India by birth irrespective of
                th e nation a lity of hi s/ he r parents.
                A pe rso n born in India on o r after July 1,
                1987 but before Decem be r 3, 2004 is co nsidered as a citi ze n of India o nly if ei ther of hi s/
                he r parents is a citize n of India at th e time
                of his/ h e r birth .
                Furth e r, those born in India on or after
                December 3, 2004 arc co ns idered c iti zens of
                In dia o nl y if both of the ir parents are citizens of In dia or one of whose parents is a
                citizen of India and the oth er is not an illega l
                migrant at the tim e of their birth.
                The children of fore ign diplomats posted
                in In dia and enemy alie ns ca nnot acquire
                Indian c iti zensh ip by birth.

                2. By Descent A pe rson born outside India
                o n or after .Ja nuary 26, 1950 but before
                Dece mbe r 10, 1992 is a c itizen of India by
                desce nt, if hi s/ he r father was a citizen of
                Indi a at th e time of his/ her birth.
                A perso n born outs ide Ind ia on or after
                Dece mbe r 10, 1992 is cons id e red as a c itize n of In dia if either of hi s/ he r parents is a
                citi ze n of India at the time of his/ her binh.
                From Dece mbe r 3, 2004 onwards, a perso n
                born outside India shall not be a citizen of
                India by descent, unless hi s/her birth is registered at an Indian consulate within one year of
                the date of birth or with th e permission ofthe
                Centra l Govern ment, after the exp iry of the
                said period. I\ n app li cation , for registration of
                the birth of a minor child, to an Indian consulate shall be acco mpani ed by an undertaking in
                writing from the pa rents of such minor child
                that he or she does not hold the pa ssport of
                another cou ntry.
                Further, a minor who is a c itizen of India
                by virtue of desce nt and is a lso a citizen of
                any othe r country shall cease to be a cit izen
                of Indi a if he or she does not renoun ce the
                citizen ship or nationa li ty of a nother co untry
                within six 1110nths of his/ her attaining fu ll age.

                3. By Registration Th e Ce ntral Governm e nt
                may register as a citizen of India any person
                ( not be ing an ill egal migrant) if he or she
                be longs to any of the fo llowing categories,
                namely: 
                    (a) a person of Indian origin who is ordi narily reside nt in India for seven years before
                    making an applicat ion for registr'dtion ;
                    (b) a perso n of Indian origin who is ordinaril y reside nt in any country or pla ce
                    o utside undivided India;
                    (c ) a pe rso n who is married to a citizen of
                    Indi a and is ordinarily resident in India
                    for seve n years before making an applicatio n for regi stration;
                    (d) minor chi ldre n of persons who are cit izens of In dia;
                    (c) a person of fu ll age and capacity whose
                    pare nts are reg istered as citizens of India;
                    (f) a perso n of full age and capac ity who,
                    or either of his/ her pa rents, was earlier
                    c iti ze n of independe nt India , an d is
                    o rdinarily res ident in India for twel ve
                    1110nths imm ediatel y before making an
                    appl ica tion for registration;
                    (g) a perso n of full age and ca pacity who has
                    bee n registered as a n overseas citizen of
                    India cardholder for five years, and who
                    is ord ina r il y res ide nt in India for twelve
                    months before making a n application
                    for registratio n .
                A person shall be deemed to be o f Indi a n
                or ig in ifhe or she, or either of their parents,
                wa s born in undivided India or in such other
                territory which beca me part of India after
                the August 15,1947.
                All the above categories of persons mu st
                take an oath of all eg iance before they a re
                registered as citizens of India.
                    - The form of the oath is as follows:
                    I, A/B ................... do solem nl y affi rm (or swear)
                    that I will bea r true fa ith and allegiance to the
                    Constitution of India as by law established, and
                    that I will faithfu lly observe the laws of India and
                    fu lfill my duties as a citizen of India.

                4. By Naturalisation The Central Government
                may grant a ce rtificate of naturalisation to any
                person (not being an ilJ ega} migrant) if he or
                she possesses the following qualifications:
                    (a) that h e/ sh e is not a subj ect or citizen of
                    any co untry where citizens ofIndia are
                    prevented from becoming subjects or citizens of that co untry by naturaHsation;

                    (b) that, ifhe/she is a citizen of any country,
                    they undertake to renoun ce th e citizenship of that country in the event of their
                    appli ca tion for Indian cit izenship being
                    accepted;

                    (e) that he/she has either resided in India or
                    been in the service of a Governm ent in
                    India or partl y the one and partly the
                    other, throughout the period of twelve
                    months immediately preceding the date
                    of the appli cation;
                    
                    (d) that during the fourteen years imme·
                    di ately preceding th e said pe ri od of
                    twelve months, h e/sh e has either resided
                    in Ind ia or been in the servi ce of a
                    Govern ment in India, or partly the one
                    and partly the other, for periods amount·
                    ing in the aggregate to not less th an
                    eleven years. However, the Citizenship
                    (Am endment) Act, 2019, has reduced this
                    aggregate period of residence or serv ice
                    of Government in India to not less than
                    five years for the perso n belonging to
                    Hindu , Sikh , Buddhist, Jain, Parsi or
                    Chri stian community in Afghanistan,
                    Bangladesh or Pakistan .

                    (e) that he/sh e is of good ch a racter;
                    
                    (f) that helsh e has an adequate knowledge
                    of a language specified in the Eighth
                    Schedule to the Constitution; and
                        - The 8th Schedule of the Constitution recognises
                        presently 22 (originally 14) languages.
                    
                    (g) that in the event of a certificate of naturalisation being granted to him / her, he/
                    she intends to reside in India, or to enter
                    into or contin ue in, se rvice under a
                    Government in India or under an international organisation of which India is a
                    member or under a society, company or
                    body of persons established in India.
                Howeve r, th e Government of India may
                waive all or any of the above condition s for
                naturalisation in the case of a person who
                has rendered dist inguish ed se rvice to the scien ce, philosophy, a rt, literature, world peace
                or hum an progress.
                Every naturalised citizen must take an oath
                of allegian ce to the Con stitution of India. 
                    - Same as footn ote 6 above.

                5. By Incorporation of Territory If any foreign territory becomes a part of India, the
                Governm ent of India specifies th e persons
                who among th e people of the territory sh all
                be th e citizen s oflndia. Such persons become
                the citizens of India from th e notifi ed date.
                For exa mpl e, when Pondi ch erry beca m e a
                part of India , the Government of Indi a issu ed
                the Citizenship (Pondich erry) Order (1962),
                under the Citizen ship Act ( 1955).

                6. Special Provisions as to Citizenship of
                Persons Covered by the Assam Accord The
                Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985, added
                the fo llowing special provisio ns as to citizenship of persons cove red by th e Assam Accord
                (which related to the foreigners' issue):
                    (a) All perso n s of Indian origin wh o ca m e
                    to As sa m b efo re January 1, ]966,
                    from Bangladesh and wh o h ave been
                    ordinaril y res idents in Assam si n ce th e
                    date of their entry into .A ssam sh all b e
                    deemed to be citizens of Indi a as from
                    January 1, 1966.

                    (b) Every perso n of India n o n g ll1 who
                    ca me to Assam on or after Janua ry 1,
                    1966 but befo re March 25, 1971 from
                    Bangla desh and who has been ordin aril y res ident in A.ssam since t he date of
                    hi s/ h e r e ntry to Assa m and who has
                    bee n de tected to be a foreig ner sha ll
                    regist e r him self. Such a reg iste red pe rso n shall be dee med to be a cit ize n of
                    Ind ia for all purpo ses as from th e date
                    of expiry of a period of ten years from
                    the date of detect ion as a foreig n e r. But,
                    in the interv en ing period of ten years,
                    he / sh e shall have t he same rights a nd
                    ob li gation s as a c iti ze n of Ind ia, excep ti ng th e right to vote.

                7. Special Provisions as to Citize nship of Persons
                Migra ted from Afgha nistan , Bangl adesh or
                Pakist an The Citi ze nship (Amen dmen t) Act,
                2019, added the follow ing specia l provis ions
                as to the citizen ship of migra nts belong ing to
                Hindu , Sikh, Buddhist, Jai n, Parsi or Christ ian
                com munit i es from Afgha n istan, Ba nglade sh
                or Pakist an who ente red into Ind ia o n or
                before Decem be r 31,2014 and who have bee n
                exemp ted from the advers e pena l co nsequ ences
                of the passpo rt (E nt ry in to India) Act, ]920 and
                the Foreig ners Act, 1946:
                    (a) The Ce ntral Gove rnm ent may grant a
                    ce rt ifi cate of regist ration or ce rti ficate
                    of natura lisatio n to such a perso n on
                    th e fulfilm e n t of the spec ifie d co nditions for reg istrat io n or qualif icatio ns
                    for natura li sa tion. Such a pe rson who
                    has been gran ted the certificate of registrati on or certi fica te o f naturali sai ton
                    shall b e deeme d to be a citize n of Indi a
                    fro m the date of hi s/ h e r e ntry into
                    Ind ia.

                    (b) Any proce edin g pe nding aga in st such a
                    perso n in respec t of ill ega l migra tion
                    or c iti ze n ship sha ll stan d ab a ted on the
                    co nfe rm e nt of c iti zen ship to him .

                    (c) These spec ial provis ions are not app li cable to tri ba l area of Assam , l\1egha laya,
                    Mizor am or Tripu ra as includ ed in the
                    Sixth Sched ul e to t he Co n st itu tion a nd
                    the area cover e d und er "Th e Inn e r
                    Line~ not ified under the Be nga l Easter n
                    Front ie r Regul ation, 1873.
                Before the enac tment of the Cit ize nshi p
                (A mend me nt) Act, 20 19, the migra nts belong .
                ing to Hindu , Si kJl , Buddh ist, Jain, Pars i OT
                Chri st ia n co mmun i ties fro m Afgha nistan ,
                Bangladesh or Paki sta n who e ntered into
                Indi a witho ut va lid passp ort and other trave l
                docum e n ts or if th e validi ty of their passp ort
                a nd oth e r docum e n ts had expire d were regga rded as illegal migra nts Hod were inelig ible
                to apply for In dian c iti ze n ship u nde r the
                provis ions (regis trat io n or natura ii saito n ) of
                t he Citi ze n ship Act, 1955.
                In 20 15, the Ce ntra l Gover nmen t exemp ted
                th e sa id migra n ts fro m the advers e pe na l CODseque nces of the passp ort (E n t ry into lndia )
                Act, ]920 an d the Foreig ners Act, ] 946. Subsequ e ntl y, in 20 ]6, the Ce n tra l Gover nmen t
                also made th e m e ligibl e for long term visa
                to stay in Ind ia.
                With the enact ment of th e Cit ize nship
                (Ame nd me nt) Act, 201 9, the sa id migra nts
                beca me e li g ible for Indi an c it ize nship . ':hi s
                Act came into fo rce on J a nuary 10, 2020.

        Loss of Citize nship
            Th e Citize nship Act ( 1955) prescr ibes three
            ways of los in g citi ze n ship wheth er acqui red
            unde r the Act or pri or to it under the Co nst itu tion, viz, ren un ciat ion, termi nation and
            depriv ation:
                1. By Renun ciatio n Any cit ize n of Indi a of
                full age and capac ity ca n make a decl a ra ti o n re noun ci n g hi s/ her Indian c iti ze n ship .
                Upo n the reg istrati o n of t hat declar a ti o n ,
                that perso n ceases to be a citize n of Indi a .
                However, if such a decla ration is made du:rin g a war in which India is e ngage d, its
                regist ration shall be withh e ld by the Cent ral
                Gove rnm e nt.                
                Furthe r, whe n a pe rso n renou nces his/ her
                Indian citize nship, every minor c hild of that
                person a lso loses Indi an citize nship . Howeve r,
                when sll ch a child attain s t he age of eighte e n.
                he/ she may (within one yea r) resum e Ind ia n
                citi ze nship.

                2. By Termination When an Ind ia n cit izen
                vo luntarily (co nsci ously, knowin gly and without duress, und ue influence o r compu lsion)
                acquires the citi ze nship of another co untry,
                hi s/ h er Indi an citize n shi p auto mati ca ll y
                te rm inates. This provisi on, however, does not
                apply durin g a war in which India is engaged.

                3. By Deprivation It is a co mpulsory termination of Ind ian citizenship by the Central
                government, if:
                    (a) the citizen has obta ined the citize nship
                    by fraud :
                    (b) th e cit izen has shown di sloya lty to the
                    Co nst itution of Indi a:
                    (c) the citizen has un lawfu ll y traded or communi ca ted with th e enemy during a war;
                    (d) the citizen has, within five years after registration or natura lisat io n , bee n impri so ned in a ny count ry fo r two years; and
                    (e) th e c itize n h as been o rdin ari ly resid e nt out of In dia for seven yea rs
                    con tinuou sly.
                        This will not apply if he/ she is a student abroad,
                        or is in the service of a governmen t in India or
                        an international organisation of which India is a
                        member, or has registered annu'llIy at an Indian
                        consulate his/ her intention to rct.1in his/ her Indian
                        citizenship.

    OVERSEAS CITIZENSHIP OF INDIA

        In Se ptember 2000 , th e Govern men t of India
        (Mi ni stry of Extern a l Affairs) had set-up a
        High Level Co mmittee on the Indian Diaspom
        under the Cha irmanship of L.M. Singh vi. Th e
        ma ndate of the Comm ittee wa s to condu ct
        a comprehensive study of the globa l India n
        Diaspora and to recomme nd measures for a
        co nstr uctive relationship with them .

        The committee submitted its report in
        January, 2002. It recommend ed the amendment 
        of the Ci tizen sh ip Act ( 1955) to provide
        for grant of dua l Citi ze nship to the Persons
        of Indian Origin ( PIOs) be longi ng to certai n
        spec ified co unt ries.

        Accord in gly, the Citi zenship (Amendment)
        Act, 2003, made provis ion for acquisition of
        Overseas Citize nsh ip of India (OCI) by the PIOs
        of 16 speC ified co un tries other tha n Pakista n
        <mel Bangladesh. It also omitted a ll provisions
        recogni sin g, or relating to the Co m mo nwea lth
        Citizenship fro m the Pri ncipal Act.

        Later, the Citi ze n ship (A mendm en t) Act,
        2005, expanded the sco pe of gra nt of OC I
        for PIOs of a ll coun tries except Pakistan and
        Bangladesh as lon g as their home co unt r ies
        allow dual citizen ship unde r their loca l laws.
        It must be noted here that the OC I is not
        actuHll y a dual ci ti ze n ships as th e In dian
        Co nstitut io n fo rbids dual Citi zen ship or dua l
        nat io nality (Article 9).

        Aga in , the Citi ze nship (A mend men t) Act,
        20IS, has modified the provis io ns pertaining
        to the OCI in the Prin Cipa l Act. It has introduced a n ew schem e ca ll ed "Overseas Citi ze n
        of India Cardholder" by merging the PIO ca rd
        scheme and the OCI card scheme.

        The PIO ca rd scheme was int rodu ced
        on August 19, 2002 an d th erea fter the OC I
        card sch eme wa s introdu ced w.e.f. Dece mber 2, 2005 . Bot h the sc h em es were runnin g in para ll el eve n t houg h th e DC ] ca rd
        sc heme h ad beco m e morc popular. This
        was ca us ing u nn ecessa ry confu s io n i n the
        minds of applicants. Keeping in view some
        probl e ms be ing fa ced by a ppli ca nts and to
        provide enhan ced faci li tie s to them, th e
        Governme n t of Indi a de c ided to formu late o n e s in g le scheme aft er merg ing th e
        PI O and OC I sche me s, conta ining pos itive
        attri bu tes of both. Hence, for achiev in g th is
        obj ec tive, the Cit ize n s hip (A me ndm e nt )
        Act, 2015, was enacted . Th e PIO sch em e was
        resc ind ed w.e.r. J a nuary 9, 201 5 an d it was
        a lso no tified that all ex ist in g PIO ca rdh o lders s hall be deemed to be OC I card h olders
        w.e.f January 9, 2015.
            - Annual Report 2015- 16, Ministry of Home Affairs,
            Governm ent of India, p. 262.

        The Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2015,
        replaced the nomenclature of "Overseas Citizen
        of India ~ with that of "Overseas Citizen of India
        Cardholder" and made the following prm;isions
        in the Principal Act:

            1. Registration of Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder
                The Central Government may register as an
                overseas citizen of India cardholder
                    (a) any person of fuB age and capacity
                        (i) who is a citizen of another country,
                        but was a citizen of India at the time
                        of, or at any time after the commencement of the Constitution; or
                        
                        (ii) who is a citizen of another country,
                        but -was eligible to become a citizen
                        of India at the time of the commencement of the Constitution; or
                        
                        (iii) who is a citi7..en of another country, but belonged to a territory that
                        became part oflndia after the 15th
                        August, 1947; or

                        (iv) who is a child or a grandchild or a
                        great grandchild of such a citizen;
                        or
                    (b) a person, who is a minor child of a person mentioned in above clause (a); or

                    (c) a person, who is a minor child, and
                    whose both parents are citizens of India
                    or one of the parents is a citizen of
                    India; or

                    (d) spouse of foreign origin of a citizen of
                    India or spouse of foreign origin of an
                    Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder
                    and whose marriage has been registered
                    and subsisted for a continuous period
                    of n,ot less than two years immediately preceding the presentation of the
                    application.

                But, a person, who or either of whose parents or grandparents or great grandparents is
                or had been a citizen of Pakistan, Bangladesh
                or such other country as the Central Government may specify, shall not be eligible for
                registration as an Overseas Citizen of India
                Cardholder.

            2. Conferment of Rights on Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder

                (1) An overseas citizen of India cardholder
                shall be entitled to such rights, as the
                Central Government may specify in this
                behalf. These are mentioned in Thble 7.1
                (under serial number 7).

                (2) An overseas citizen of India cardholder
                shall not be entitled to the followfng
                rights (which are conferred on a citizen
                of India)
                    (a) He/she shall not be entitled to the right
                    to equaHty of opportunity in matters
                    of public employment (Article 16).

                    (b) He/she shan not be eligible for election as President (Article 58).

                    (c) He/ she shan not be eligible for election as Vice-President (Article 66).

                    (d) He / she shall not be eligible for
                    appointment as a Judge of the
                    Supreme Court (Article 124).

                    (e) He/she shall not be eligible for
                    appointment as a Judge of the High
                    Court (Article 217).
                    
                    (f) He/she shall not be entitled for
                    registration as a voter.
                    
                    (g) He/she shall not be eligible for
                    being a member of the House of the
                    People or of the Council of States.
                    
                    (h) He/she shall not be eligible for
                    being a member of the State
                    Legislative Assembly or the State
                    Legislative Council.

                    (i) He / she shall not be eligible for
                    appointment to public services and
                    posts in connection with affairs of
                    the Union or of any State except for
                    appointment in such services and
                    posts as the Central Government
                    may specify.

            3. Renunciation of Overseas Citizen of India Card
                (1) Any overseas citizen of India cardholder
                can make a declaration renouncing
                his/her overseas citizen of India
                cardholder status. After that declaration
                is registered by the Central Government,
                such person ceases to be an overseas citizen of India cardholder.

                (2) Where a person ceases to be an overseas
                citizen of India cardholder, the spouse of
                foreign origin of that person (who has
                obtained overseas citizen of India card)
                and every minor child of that person
                (registered as an overseas citizen of
                India cardholder) also ceases to be an
                overseas citizen of India cardholder.

            4. CanceUation of Registration as Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder
                The Central Government may cancel the registration of a person as an overseas citizen of
                India cardholder, if it is satisfied that:
                    (a) the registration as an overseas citizen of
                    India cardholder was obtained by means
                    of fraud, false representation or the concealment of any material fact; or

                    (b) the overseas citizen of India cardholder
                    has shown disaffection towards the
                    Constitution of India; or

                    (c) the overseas citizen of India cardholder
                    has, during any war in which India may
                    be engaged, unlawfully traded or communicated with an enemy; or

                    (d) the overseas citizen of India cardholder
                    has, within five years after registration,
                    been sentenced to imprisonment for a
                    term of not less than two years; or

                    (e) the overseas citizen of India cardholder
                    has violated the provisions of the
                    Citizenship Act (1955) or the provisions of any other law as may be specified by the Central Government. This
                    provision was added by the Citizenship
                    (Amendment) Act, 2019; or

                    (f) it is necessary so to do in the interests of
                    the sovereignty and integrity of India,
                    the security of India, friendly relations
                    of India with any foreign country, or in
                    the interests of the general public; or

                    (g) the marriage of an overseas citizen of
                    India cardholder
                        (i) has been dissolved by a competent
                        court of law or otherwise; or
                        (ii) has not been dissolved but (during
                        the subsistence of such marriage)
                        he/ she has solemnised marriage
                        with any other person.

                However, before the cancellation of his/ her
                registration as an overseas citizen of India
                cardholder, he/ she will be given a reasonable
                opportunity of being heard. This provision
                was also added by the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019.


------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 7.1

Comparing NRI, PIO and OCI Cardholder

ll

51

ElemEnts of

Non Resident

Person of Indian

No

Comp,lflson

Indian (NRI)

Origin (PIO)

An Indian
citizen who
is ordinarily
residing outside India and
holds an Indian
Passport

A person who 0(
whose any of ancestors was an Indian
national and who Is
presently holding
another country's citizenship I nationality
i.e. he/she Is holding
foreign passport

1.

Who?

21 69

Overse(lS Citizen of India (OCI) Cardholder

A person registered as Overseas CItizen of
India (OCI) Cardholder under the CItizenshIp
Act, 1955

(Contd.)

llThis table is downloaded from the website of Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India.

70

P

Indion Polity

Following categories of foreign nattonats are
eligible for reg1straUon as Overseas CItizen
of India (Octi Cardholder:(I) Who was a citizen of tndla at the time of.
or at any Ume after the commencement
of the Constitution i.e. 26.01.1950: or
(II) who was eligible to become a cruzen of
India on 26.01.1950; or
(Iii) who belonged to a territory that became
part of India after 15.08.1947; or
(Iv) who Is a child or a grandchild or a
great grandchild of such a Citizen; or
(v) who is a minor child of such persons
mentioned above; ~r
(vi) who is a minor child and whose both
parents are citizens of Indla or one of
the parents Is a citizen of Inena; or
(vii) spouse of (orelgn origIn of a citizen of
India or spouse of foreTgn origin of an
Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder
registered under the Citizenship Act.
1955 and whose marrtage has been
registered and subsisted for a continuous period of not less than two years
Immediately preceding the p"~~,,
of the application.

..tloCi I

3.

How can one get?

Eligible persons to apply online.

4.

Wher. to
apply?

(I)

Applicants outside India:
(a) The Indian MlsslonlPost having
jurisdiction over the country of
which applicant Is a citizen; or
{bl If he/she Is not living In the country
of hlslhet citizenship. to the Indll!!"
Mlsslon/POst having jurisdiction
over the country of which the
eppllcant is ordinarily resident.
(II) Appilcents In India:
If the applicant Is residing In India. to the
Foreigners Regional Registration
(FRROs) according to their jurisdictional'
control.
Nole: For the ebove ijUJpOSe. 'ordlnarlly
resident' will mean a person staying In a
particular country or In Indle for a continlSOUS
period of 6 months.

omc:es

5.

Fees?

(a)

(b)

in case of application submitted in
India n Mission/Post abroad-US $275 or
equ ivalent In local currency.
In case of application submitted in
Indla-'f1 5.000/-

Citizenship

I 51'
Nc

6.

7.

Elements of
CompMlson

Non ResIdent
Indl,1n (NRI)

Person of Indl(ln
OrigIn (PIO)

71

Overseas C,t,zen of IndIa (OCI) Cardholdel

No person, who or either of whose parents
or grandparents or great grandparents is or
had been a citizen of Pakistan, Bangladesh
or such other country as the Cent ral
Governmen't may specify, shall be eligible
for registration as an Overseas Citizen of
India Cardholder.

Which natiQnalS::
are Ineligible?

What benefits one
is entitled to?

~

All benefits as
available to
Indian citizens
subject to
notifications
issued by the
Government
from time to time

No specific benefits

(i) Multiple entry lifelong visa for visiting
India for any purpose. However, the
OCI Cardholder Is required to obtain a
special permission or a special permit
from the competent authority or the
FRROs or the Indian Mission con·
cerned for understanding the following
activities:
(a) to undertake research;
(b) to undertake any Missionary or
Tabligh or Mountaineering or
Journa listic activities;
(cl to undertake internship in any
foreign Diplomatic Missions or
foreign Government organisations
in India or to the take up employ·
ment in any foreign Diplomatic
Missions In India;
(d) to visit any place which falls within
the Protected or Restricted or
Prohibited areas as notified by the
Central Government or competent
authority.
(iI) Exemption from registration with
Foreigners Regional Registration Officer
(FRRO) or Foreigners Registration Officer
(FRO) for any length of stay in India.
(iiO Parity with Indian nationals in the matter
of:
(,) tariffs in air fares in domestic
sectors In India; and
(b) entry fees to be charged for visiting
national parks, wildlife sanctuaries,
the national monuments, historical
sites and museums in India.
(Iv) Parity with Non-Resident Indians In the
matter of:
(a) inter-country adoption of Indian
children;
(Conrd.)

72

{I Indian Polity

51

EI('m('nl~

of

Non R('sld(> nt

Pf'rson of Ind,.ln

No

Compilr l5011

Illdl<1rl (NRI)

Origin (PIO)

Overse ils Citizen of Illdlil (OCI) Cardho lder

(b)

(c)

(d)

appearing for the all India
entrance tests such as National
Eligibility cum Entrance Test. Joint
Entrance Examination (Malnsl
Advanced) or such other tests to
make them eligible for admission
only against any Non-Resident
Indian seat or any super numeracy
seat. However, the OCI Cardholder
Is not eligible for admission
against any seat reserved exclusively for Indian citizens.
purchase or sale of Immovable
properties other than agricultural
land or farm house or plantation
property; and
Pursuing the following professions
in India:
- doctors, dentists, nurses and

pharmacists;
tes;
advoca
ts; and
architec
accountants
ed
charter
shall have the
lder
(v) The ocr Cardho
es as a fotprivileg
same rights and
economic,
other
all
of
elgner In respect
not
fields
onal
financial and educati
by
issued
tion
specified in the notifica
rights
the
or
the Central Government
and privileges not covered in the noUficatlons issued by the Reserve Bank
of India under the Foreign Exchange
Management Act. 1999.
(vi) The OCI Cardholders are eligible for
appointment as teaching faculty in
IITs, NITs, IIMs, IISERs. liSe. Central
UnIversities and In the new AIIMS set
up under Pradhan Mantrl Swasthya
Suraksha Yojana.

,..,-.... "....
tIfoIon§
- "'
OIIIry
-:.".."..
rd Is 1tseIf·:.-.-...
::-"":
-:o=o ee

8.

9.

_

Is he/she required
to register wilh
the local ponce
authorities in
India?

No

Yes if the period
of stay Is for more
than 180 days

No

for "\Siting india.

Citizenship
51

Elements of

Non Resident

Person of Indian

No

Comparison

Indian (NRI)

Origin (PIO)

10.

, 1.

What actMUes
can be undertaken In India?
How can one
acquire Indian
citizenship?

QV('rsei'ls Citizen of Indl,' (OCI) C.ltdholdef

the type of visa

ActIvIty as per

All actMIIes e>eept_ ICIMIIos lot
whk:h prior permission or special permit Is

obtained

required.

He/she is an

As per the

Indian citizen

Citizenship Act. 1955,

As per the Citizenship Act, 1955. a person
registered as an OCI cardholder for 5 years
and who Is ordinarily resident in India for
twelve months before making an application
for registration Is eligible for grant of Ind ian
citizenship.

All ActIvItIes

he/she has to be

ordinarily resident in
India for a period of

7 years before makIng an application
for registration.
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------


------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 7.2

~ 73

Articles Related to Citizenship at a Glance

5.

Citizenship at the commencement of the Constitution

6.

Rights of Citizenship of certain persons who have migrated to India from Pakistan

7.

R!ghts of citizenship of certain migrants to Pakistan

8.

Rights of citizenship of certain persons of Indian origin residing outside lnetla

9.

Persons voluntarily acquiring citizenship of a foreign State not to be citizens

10.

Continuance of the rights of Citizenship

11 .

Parliament to regulate the right of citizenship by law
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------


CHAPTER 8: Fundamental Rights

    The Funda m e nta l Rights are e nsh rined
    in Pa rt III of the Co nstitu tion from
    Articl es 12 to 35. I n this regard , the
    frame rs of the Const itutio n de rived inspir ation from t h e Co nst itutio n of USA ( i.e., Bill
    of Rights ).

    Part III of the Const it ut ion is rightl y
    descri bed as the Magna Carra of Indi a. It
    con tain s a vcry long and co mpre hen sive list
    of 'justic iabl e' Funda menta l Rights. In fac t,
    th e Funda m e nta l Rights in our Co nstitu tion
    are morc elabo rate than those found in th e
    Co n stitu t ion of a ny other count ry in th e
    wo rld , includ ing the USA.
    T he Funda me ntal Rights are guara nteed by
    the Con stituti on to a ll person s witho u t any
    di sc rimin ation . Th ey uph o ld the eq uality of
    all ind ividua ls, the dignit y of the ind ivid ual,
    the large r publ ic intere st and unity of the
    na tion.
        Magn a Carta ' is (he Charte r of Rights issued by
        King Joh n of England in 1215 under p ressure from
        the ba rons. This is the lirslll' ritlen document relat-
        ing to the Funda mentIll Ri ghts of citizens.

    Th e Funda menta l Rights are mea n t for
    prom oting the idea l of politi ca l democ racy.
    They preven t the establishm e nt of a n <luthoritarian and despo ti c rul e in the co untry, a nd
    protec t the lib e rties and freedo m s of t he
    people again st the inva sion by the State. They
    op e rat e as limita tions on the tyran ny o f the
    execu tive and a rbitra ry laws of the legisla ture.
    In short, they aim a t establ ishing 'a gove rnment of laws and n ot of m e n '.

    Th e Funda menta l Right s are name d so
    beca use t h ey arc guar< lntecd a nd prote c ted
    by the Const it ut ion , whi c h is the funda m ental 
    law of th e land. Th ey are 'fund ame ntal'
    also in the se n se th at they are most essen t ial 
    for the all-ro un d devel opm e nt (ma terial, intell ectua l, 
    mora l and spirit ual ) of t h e indivi duals.

    Origin a ll y, th e Co n st itutio n provid ed for
    seve n Funda menta l Rights viz,
        1. Right to equal ity (A rt icles 14-1 8)
        2. Right to freedo m (A rticl es 19-22 )
        3. Right aga inst exploi tation (Articles 23-24)
        4. Right to freedo m of re ligion (Artic les 25-28)
        5. Cultur al and educa t ion a l rights (A rticles 29-30)
        6. Right to prope rty (Art icl e 31)
        7 . Right to con st itution al remed ies ( Arti de 32)

    However, the right to prope rty was delete d
    from the list of funda m e ntal Rights by th e
    44t h Am e ndme nt Act, 197B. It is made a legal
    right under Articl e 300-/\ in Part XII of the
    Co nst itutio n . So, at presen t, there are onl y
    six Funda menta l Rights. Th ese are menti on ed
    in T'dble B.l.

    FEATURES OF FUN DAM ENTA L RIGHTS
        The Funda ment.a l Rights guara nteed by t he
        Const itution are cha ra cteri sed by the fo ll Owing:

            1. So me of them arc availa ble on ly to rh e
            citize n s whi le others are availa ble to all
            pe rso n s wheth er cit izens, fore ign e rs or
            lega l perso ns like co rpora tion s or co mpani es. 
            The Funda m e ntal Rights t hat are
            ava ilable to foreigners are mentioned in
            '!lible 8.2.

            2. They are not absolute but qualified. The
            state can impose reasonable restrie·
            tions on them. However, whether such
            restrictions are reasonable or not is to
            be decided by the courts. Thus, they
            strike a balance between the rights of
            the individual and those of the society
            as a whole, between individual liberty
            and social contro1.

            3. All of them are available against the arbitrary action of the state. However, some
            of them are also available against the
            action of private individuals:

            4: Som~ of them are negative in character,
            that is, place limitations on the authority of the State, 
            while others are positive
            in nature, conferring certain privileges
            on th e persons.

            5. They are justiciable, al10wing persons to
            move the courts for their e·nforcement,
            if and when they are violated.

            6. They are defended and guaranteed by the
            Supreme Court. Hence, the aggrieved
            per~on ca n directly go to the Supreme
            Court, not necessarily by way of appeal
            against the judgement of the high
            courts.

            7. They are not sacrosan ct or permanent.
            The Parliament can curtail or repeal
            them but onl y by a constitutional
            amendment act and not by an ordinary
            act. Moreover, this can be done without
            affecting the 'basic structure' 'of the
            Constitution.

            8. They can be suspended during the operation 
            of a National Emergency except the
            rights guaranteed by Articles 20 and 21.
            Further, the six rights guaranteed by Article
            19 are automatically suspended only when
            emergency is declared on the grounds of
            war or external aggression (i.e., external
            emerge ncy) and not on the ground of
            armed rebellion (i.e., internal emergency).

            9. Their scope of operation is limited by
            Article 31A (savi ng of laws providing for
            acq ui sition of estates, etc.), Article 31B
            (validation of certain acts and regulations included in the 9th Sc hedule) a nd
            Article 31C (saving of laws giv ing effect
            to ce rta in directive prin cip les).

            10 . Their application to the members of armed
            forces, para-military forces, police forces,
            inte11igen ce agencies and analogous services 
            can be restricted or abrogated by
            the Parliament (Article 33).

            11 . Their app li catio n ca n he re stricted
            while martial law is in force in any
            area. Martial law mea n s ' military rule'
            imposed under abnormal circumstances
            to restore order (Article 34). It is dif·
            ferent fro m the imposition of national
            eme rgen cy.

            12. Most of th em are directly enforceable
            (self-executory) while a few of them can
            be enforced on the basis of a law made
            for giving effect to them. Such a law ca n
            be made only by the Parliament and not
            by state legislatures so that uniformity
            throughout the country is maintained
            (Article 35).

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 8.1
I

Fundamental Rights at a Glance

Category

ConSists of

1. Right to equality (Articles 14-18)

(a) Equality before law and equal protection of laws (Article 14).
(b) Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or
place of birth (Article 15),
Ie) Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment (Article 16).
(d) Abolition of untouchability and prohibition of its practice (Article 17),
Ie) AboUtion oftlUes except military and academic (Article1S).

2. Right to freedom (Articles 19-22)

(a) Protection of six rights regarding freedom of: (i) speech and
expression, (ii) assembly. (iii) association, (Iv) movement, (v) residence,
and (vi) profession (Article 19).
(bl Protection in respect of conviction for offences (Article 20).
Ie) Protection of life and personal liberty (Article 21).
(d) Right to elementary education (Article 21A).
Ie) Protection against arrest and detention in certain cases (Article 22).

3. Right against exploitation (Articles

(a) Prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour (Article 23).
(b) Prohibition of employment of chlfdren In factories, etc. (Article 24).

4 . Right to freedom of religion (Article

(a) Freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation
of religion (Article 25).
(b) Freedom to manage religious affairs (Article 26).
(c) Freedom from payment of taxes for promotion of any religion (Article 27).
(d) Freedom from attending religlOlJ s Instruction or worship in certain
educational Institutions (Article 28).

23-24)

25-28)

5. Cultural and educational rights
(ArtiCles 29-30)

6. Right to constitutional reO
(Article 32)

.,

~ 75

es

la) Protection of language, script and culture of minorities (Article 29).
(b) Right of minorities to establish and administer educational1nstitutions
(Article 30).
Right to move the Supreme Court for the enforcement of fundamental
rights including the writs of (i) habeas corpus, (Ii) mandamus, (III) prohlbi·
tlon, (Iv) certiorari, and (v) quo war-rento (Article 32).
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------


------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 8.2

Fundamental Rights (FR) of Foreigners

FR available only to ctttzens and not to foretgners

FR avatlable to both ctttzens and foretgners (e)(cept
enemy ahens)

1. Prohibition of discrimi nation on grounds of reli gion,

1. Equality before law and equal protection of laws

race, caste, sex or place of birth (Article 15).

(Article 14).

2. Protection in respect of conviction for offences
2. Equality of opportunity In matters of publiC employ_
_
_
(ArtiCle 20).
ment {Article 1;;6::).~_ _ _ __

--

3. Protection of six rights regardin g freedom of: (I) speech
and expression, (ii) assembly, (Iii) association, (iv) movement, (v) residence, and (vi) profession (Article 19).

3. Protection of life an d personal liberty (Article 2 1).

4. Protection of language, scrlpt and culture of minori·
ties (Article 29).

4. Right to elementary education (Article 21 AI·

5. Right of minorities to establish and administer educa·
tiona I Institutions (Article 30).

5. Protection against arrest and detention in certain
cases (Article 22).

-~--

6. Prohibition of traffic In human beings and forced
labour (Article 23).
7. Prohi bition of employment of children in factories
etc .• (Article 24).

8. Freedom of conscience and free profession. practice and propagation of religion (ArtIcle 251.
9. Freedom to manage religious affairs (Article 26).

r

10. Freedom from payment of taxes for promotion of
any religion (Article 27).
11 . Freedom from attending relig ious Instruction or worship in certain educational Institutions (Article 28).
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------


    DEFINITION OF STATE

        The term 'State' has been used in different provisions concerning the fundamental
        rights. Hence, Article 12 has defined the term
        for the purposes of Part Ill. According to it,
        the State includes the following:
            (a) Government and Parliament of India, that
            is, executive and legislative organs of the
            Union government.

            (b) Government and legislature of states, that
            is, executive and legislative organs of
            state government.

            (c) All local authorities, that is, municipalities, panchayats, district boards, improvement trusts, etc.

            (d) All other authorities, that is, statutory
            or non-statutory authorities like LIe,
            ONGC, SAIL, etc.

        Thus, State has been defined in a wider
        sense so as to include all its agencies. It is
        the actions of these agencies that can be challenged 
        in the courts as violating the Fundamental Rights.

        According to the Supreme Court, even a
        private body or an agency working as an
        instrument ofthe State falls within the meaning 
        of the 'State' under Article 12.

    LAWS INCONSISTENT WITH FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS

        Article 13 declares that all laws that are
        inconsistent with or in derogation of any of
        the fundamental rights shall be void. In other
        wO'rds, it expressively provides for the doctrine of judicial review. This power has been
        conferred on the Supreme Court (Article 32)
        and the high courts (Article 226) that can
        declare a law unconstitutional and invalid
        on the ground of contravention of any of the
        Fundamental Rights.

        The term 'law' in Article 13 has been
        given a wide connotation so as to include the
        following:
            (a) Pennanent laws enacted by the Parliament
            or the state legislatures;

            (b) Thmporary laws like ordinances issued by
            the president or the state governors;

            (c) Statutory instruments in the nature of
            delegated legislation (executive legislation) 
            like order, bye-law, rule, regulation
            or notification; and

            (d) Non-legislative sources of law, that is,
            custom or usage having the force of law.

        Thus, not only a legislation but any of the
        above can be challenged in the courts as violating 
        a Fundamental Right and hence, can
        be declared as void.

        Further, Article 13 declares that a constitutional 
        amendment is not a law and hence
        cannot be challenged. However, the Supreme
        Court held in the Kesavananda Bharati case2
        (1973) that a Constitutional amendment can
        be challenged on the ground that it violates
        a fundamental right that forms a part of
        the 'basic structure' of the Constitution and
        hence, can be declared as void.
            - Kesavnanda Bharati vs. State of Kerala (1973).

    RIGHT TO EQUALITY

        1. Equality before Law and Equal Protection of Laws
            Article 14 says that the State shall not deny
            to any person equality before the law or the
            equal protection of the laws within the territory of India. This provision confers rights
            on all persons whether citizens or foreigners.
            Moreover, the word 'person' includes legal
            persons, viz, statutory corporations, companies, registered societies or any other type of
            legal person.

            The concept of 'equality before laW' is of
            British origin while the concept of 'equal protection oflaws' 
            has been taken from the American Constitution. 
            The first concept connotes:
                (a) the absence of any special privileges in
                favour of any person, 
                
                (b) the equal subjection
                of all persons to the ordinary law of the land
                administered by ordinary law courts, and 
                
                (c) no person (whether rich or poor, high or low,
                official or non-official) is above the law.
            The second concept, on the other hand, connotes: 
                (a) the equality of treatment under
                equa l circumstances, both in the pri vi leges
                conferred a nd liabi lities imposed by the laws,

                (b) the si mi1 ar app li ca tion of t he sa me laws
                to all persons who are sim ila rly situated, and

                (c) the lik e shou ld be treated al ike witho ut
                any di scrim inat ion. Thus, the for m er is a
                negative co ncep t whil e t he latter is a pos itive
                concept. I-I owever, both of them aim at establi shing 
                equa li ty of lega l status, opportunity
                and just ice.

            The Supreme Co urt held that where equals
            and unequals are treated differently, Art icle 14
            does not apply. While Article 14 forbids class
            legis lat io n , it permits reasonab le classification of perso ns, objects and transact ions by
            t he law. But the class ification s ho uld n ot
            be arbitrary, artificial or evas ive. Ra.ther, it
            shou ld be based on an inte lli gible differentia l
            and substantial di stin ction.

            Rule of Law The co ncept of 'eq uali ty before
            law' is an ele ment of t he concept of 'Rule of
            Law', propou nded by A.V. Dicey, t he British
            jurist. His co n cept ha s the fo ll owing three
            elem ents or aspects:
                (i) Absence of arbit rary power, that is,
                no m a n ca n be pu ni shed except for a
                b reac h of law.
                
                (ii) Equality before the law, that is, eq ual subjectio n of all ci ti ze ns (rich or poor, hig h
                or low, officia l or non-officia l) to the
                o rdina r y law of the land admi ni ste red
                by the ordinary law courts
                    Dicey observe: ~No man is above the law, but every
                    man, whatever be his rank or condition, is subject
                    to the ordinary law of the rea lm and amenabl e to
                    the ju ri sdiction of the ordinary tribuna ls. Every
                    official from the Prime Minister down to a const.,ble a r a co llector of taxes, is under the s.a me responsibi lity for every act done Ivilhaut legalj ustificatian
                    liS any other citizcn ~ (A.V. Dicey, I"troducrion to the
                    Study of rile UlW of the ConstiluriOIl, Macl11 ilia 11, 1931
                    Edition pp. 183-191).

                (iii) T he primacy of the rights of the in d ivid ua l, that is, the co nst itu tion is the
                resu lt of t he rig hts of the individual as
                defi n ed and enforced by t he courts of
                law rat her than t he constitut ion being
                the so urce of t he i ndj vidua l rights.

            T h e first and t he seco nd e leme n ts are
            <lpp li cable to th e Indian System and not the
            third one. In the India n Syste m, the co nst itu tion 
            is the source of the i nd ividu a l rights.

            T he Supreme Court held that the ' Rule of
            Law' as embodied in Article 14 is a 'bas ic
            feat u re' of the constitution. Hence, it can not
            be dest royed even by an a m endment.

            Exceptions to Equality The rule of eq uality
            before law is not absolute a nd t here are const 
            itutional and othe r except ions to it. These
            are ment ioned below:
                1. The President of Ind ia and the Governor
                of States e njoy the fo ll owin g immuniti es
                (Article 361),
                    (i) The President or the Governor is
                    not a nswerab le to any co urt for the
                    exe rcise .md performance of the
                    powers and duties of his/ her office.
                    (ii) No criminal proceedi ngs sha ll be
                    instituted or continued against the
                    President or the Governor in a ny
                    co urt during his/ her term of office.
                    (iii) No process for the arrest or imp ris-onment of the Pres ident or t he
                    Governor sha ll be iss ued from any
                    court during his/her term of office.
                    ( iv) No c ivil proceed ings against the
                    Preside nt o r t he Governor shall be
                    instituted during his/ her term of
                    office in Hny co urt in respect of
                    a ny act done by him/ her in his/
                    he r perso nal ca pac i ty, whether
                    before or after he/ she entered upon
                    hi s/ her office, until the expiration
                    of two months next after notice has
                    been deli vered to him / her.

                2. No person sha ll be liable to a ny civil or
                crim ina l proceedings in a ny court in
                res pect of the publica tion in a n ewspaper (or by rad io or television) of a
                substa nti<l ll y true repo rt of any proceedings of either House of Parliament o r
                either House of the Legislature of a State
                (Article 361·A).

                3. No member of Parliament sha ll be liabl e
                to any proceedings in any co u rt in
                respect of a nythin g sa id or any vote
                gi ven by him / her in Parli ament or an y
                committee th ereof (A rticle 105).

                4. No member of th e Legislature of a state
                shall be Hable to a ny p roceedings in an y
                court in respect of anything said or an y
                vote given by him / h er in the Legi slature
                or any co mmitte·e thereof (Article 194).
                
                5. Articl e 31-C is an exception to Articl e 14.
                It provides that th e laws made by th e
                state for implem en t in g th e Directi ve
                Principl es con ta in ed in clause (b ) or
                clause (c) of Articl e 39 ca nnot be .ch allen ged on the ground th at they are violati ve of Arti cle 14. Th e Suprem e Court
                h eld th at "where Arti cle 31-C comes in,
                Article 14 goes out".
                
                6. Th e foreign sovereigns ( rul ers) , ambassadors and diplomats enjoy immunity
                from criminal an d civ il proceedings.
                
                7. The UNO and its agen cies enjoy the diplom atic immunity.

        2. Prohibition of Discrimination on Certain Grounds

            Article 15 prov ides that the State sh all n ot
            discrim in ate agai n st an y citize n on grounds
            on ly of religion, ra ce, caste, sex or place of
            birth. Th e two crucial words in this provision
            are 'di scriminat ion ' and 'onl y'. The word
            'discrimin at ion' m ea ns 'to make an adverse
            di stin ction with regard to' or 'to distingui sh
            unfavourably from oth ers'. Th e use of th e
            word 'o nly' co nnotes that di scriminatio n o n
            other grounds is not prohibited.

            The second provision of Article IS says that
            n o citizen shall be subjected to any di sability,
            liability, restriction or condition on grounds
            only of religion, race, caste, sex, or place of birth
            with regard to (a) access to shops, public restaurants, 
            hotels and places of public entertainment;
            or (b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, road
            and places of public resort maintained wholly
            or partly by State funds or dedi cated to the use
            of general publ ic. This provision prohibits discrimin ation 
            both by the Sta te and private individuals, while the former provision prohibits
            discrimination only by the State.

            There are four exceptions to this ge neral
            rul e of n on-d iscri min at ion :
                (a) The state is permitted to make any specia l
                provision fo r wom en and children . Fo r
                exa mpl e, resetvati on of seats for wo men
                in local bodies or prov ision of free educatio n for children .

                (b) The state is permitted to make any special
                prov isio n for the adva n cement of any
                sociall y a nd edu cation all y backwa rd
                classes o r for th e sch edul ed castes a nd
                th e sch edul ed tribes 4 , For exampl e, reservation of seats or fee con cessions in
                publ ic educa ti on al institu tions.
                    This prov isio n was added by the Fi rst Ame ndm ent
                    Act of 1951.

                (c) Th e state is empowered to m ake a ny
                specia l provi sion for the adva n ce men t
                of any sociall y and educa tionall y backward classes or for th e sch edul ed castes
                and th e sch eduled tribes regarding th eir
                admi ssion to educat ion al institutio ns.
                This also in cl ud es the priva te edu cati on al instituti o ns, wh eth er a id ed o r
                un aided by the state, except th e min ority
                edu ca tional institution s.

                (d) The state is empowered to make any special provision for the advan cemen t of any
                econ omically weaker sections. Further,
                the state is allowed to make a provision
                for the resetvation of upto 10% of seats fo r
                such secti ons in admission to education al
                institutions includin g·private educational
                institutions, wheth er aided or unaided by
                the state, except th e minority educational
                institutions. This reservation of upto 10%
                would be in addition to the existing reservations. For this purpose, the econ omically weaker sections would be notified by
                the state fro m time to time on the basis
                of family incom e an d oth er indicators of
                econ omic disadva ntage.

                The various provisions contained in Article
                I S are summarised in 'table 8.3.

            Reservation for OBCs in Educational Institutions
            The above exception (c) was added by the 93rd

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 8.3

Article No.

Indian Polity

Provisions of Article 15 (Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste,
sex or place of birth) at a Glance
Subject Matter

15(1)

The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex,
place of birth or any of them.

15(2)

No citizen shall be subjected to any disability, liability, restriction or condition on grounds only
of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them with regard to the following:
(a) access to ShOps. public restaurants. hotets and places of public entertainment; or
(b) the use of walls, tanks. bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort maintained whOlly
or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the general public.

15(3)

The State is not prevented from making any special provision for women and children.

15(4)

The State is not prevented from making any special provision for the advancement of any SOCially
and educationally backwards classes or for the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. This provl.
sian was added by the 1st Amendment Act, 195t

15(5)

The State is not prevented from making any special provision for the advancement of any socially
and educationally backwards classes or for the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes regard·
ing their admission to educational Institutions. This also Includes the private educational motlva·
tions, whether aided or unaided by the State, except the minority educational Institutions. Th is
provision was added by the 93rd Amendment Act, 2005.

15(6)

The State Is not prevented from making the fOllowl
~n·g·:- - - (a) any special provision for the advancement of any economically weaker sections; and
(b) a provision for the reservation of upto 10% of seats for such sections In admisskm to educational Institutions Including private educatlonallnstltutlons, whether aided or unaided by the
State (except the minority educational Institutions).
This provision was added b the 103rd Amendment Act, 2019.
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

            Amendment Act of 2005. In order to give
            effect to this provision , the Ce ntre enacted the
            Ce ntra l Educationa l Institutions ( Rese rvation
            in Adm iss io n) Act, 2006, providing a qu ota
            of 27% for ca nd idates be longi ng to the Other
            Backward Classes (O BCs) in a ll centra l higher
            edu ca tional in stitutions including t he Indian
            Inslitutes of Technology ( illS) and the Indian
            In stitutes of Management ( II Ms). In Apri l 2008,
            the Su preme Court upheld the va lidity of both,
            the Amendment Act and the OBC Quota Act.
            But, the Court di rected the ce ntral government
            to exclude th e 'cre.:lmy laye r' (advan ced section s) among the OBCs whil e imple me nting
            the law.

            The c hildren of the fo ll owing differe nt
            catego ri es of peopl e belong (0 the 'crea my
            laye r ' among the O BCs and th us wi ll nor get
            t he quota be nefi t:

                1. Persons h o lding co n sti tu t ional posts
                li ke Pre s ident, Vice·Preside n t, ,Ju dges
                of SC and HCs, Chairman a nd Members
                of UPSC a nd SPSCs, CEC, CAG and
                so on.

                2. Group 'A' / Class I and Group ' B' / Class
                II Orficers of th e All Ind ia, Ce ntral and
                Swte Se r vices; and Em ployees h old ing equiva le nt posts in PSUs, Banks,
                Insura n ce Organisations, Uni vers it ies
                etc. , and also in pr iva te e mp loyment.

                3. Perso ns who are i n the «Ill k of co lo ne l
                and above in t he Army and equivalent
                posts in the Navy, the Air Fo rce and the
                Para mi li tary Forces.

                4. Professio na ls like doctors, lawyers, eng i"
                neers, a rti sts, a ut hors, co nsu ltants a nd
                so on.

                5. Pe rso ns engaged in t rade, busin ess a nd
                indu st ry.

                6 . People holding agr icultura l land above a
                ce rta in limit and vaca n t land or buildi ngs in urban area s.

                7. Persons having gross annual income of
                more than 't8 lakh or possessing wealth
                above the exemption limit. In 1993, when
                the "creamy layer" ceiling was introduced,
                it was 'tl lakh. It was subsequently revised
                to ns lakh in 2004, ~4.S lakh in 2008,
                ~6lakh in 2013 and ~8 lakh in 2017.


            Re ser v at ion for EWSs in Educat io nal
            In st itutions The above exception (d) was
            added by the 103rd Amendment Act of 20) 9.
            In order to give effect to this provision, th e
            central government issued an order (in 2019)
            providing 10% reservation to the Economically
            Weaker Sections (EWSs) in admission to educational institutions. The benefit of this reservation can be availed by the persons belonging
            to EWSs who are not covered under any of the
            existing schemes of reservations for SCs, STh
            and OBCs. The eligibility criteria laid down in
            this regard is as follows:
                1. Persons whose family has gross annual
                income below 't8 lakh are to be identified as EWSs for the benefit of reservation. The income would include income
                from an sources i.e., salary, agriculture,
                business, profession etc. and it would be
                income for the financial year prior to
                the year of application .

                2. Persons whose family owns or possesses
                anyone of the following assets are to be
                excluded from being identified as EWSs,
                irrespective of the family income:
                    (a) 5 acres of Agricultural land 'and
                    above.
                    
                    (b) Residential flat of 1000 sq.ft. and
                    above.
                    
                    (c) Residential plot of 100 sq.yards and
                    above in notified municipalities.

                    (d) Residential plot of 200 sq.yards and
                    above in areas other than the notified municipalities.

                3. The property held by a family in different 
                locations or different places / cities
                would be clubbed while applying the
                land or property holding test to determine EWS status.

                4. Family for this purpose would include the
                person who seeks benefit of reservation,
                his/ her parents and siblings below the
                age of 18 years as also his/her spouse
                and children below the age of 18 years.


        3. Equality of Opportunity in Public Employment

            Article 16 provides for equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters of employment
            or appointment to any office under the State.
            No citizen can be discriminated against or be
            ineligible for any employment or office under
            the State on grounds of only religion, race,
            caste, sex, descent, place of birth or residence.

            There are four exceptions to this general
            rule of equality of opportunity in public
            employment:

                (a) Parliament can prescribe residence as
                a condition for certain employment
                or appointment in a state or union
                territory or local authority or other
                authority. As the Public Employment
                (Requirement as to Residence) Act of
                1957 expired in 1974, there is no such
                provision for any state except Andhra
                Pradesh 5 and Thlangana 5a .
                    - By virtue of Article 3710 inserted by the 32nd
                    Amendment Act of 1973.
                    - Article 371D has been extended to the state of
                    Telangana by the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation
                    Act, 2014.

                (b) The State can provide for reservation of
                appointments or posts in favour of any
                backward class that is not adequately represented in the state services. Also, the
                State is empowered to provide for reservation in promotions, with consequential
                seniority, in the services under the State
                in favour of the Scheduled castes and
                Scheduled tribes that are not adequately
                represented in the state services. Further,
                the State is empowered to consider the
                unfilled reserved vacancies of a year as a
                separate class of vacancies to be filled up
                in any succeeding year or years and such
                class of vacancies are not to be combined
                with the vacancies of the year in which
                they are being filled up to detennine
                the ceiling of 50% reservation on total
                number of vacancies of that year.

                (c) A law can prov ide that the in cumbe nt of
                an offi ce re lated to re li g iou s or de nomi national in stitu tion or a me mbe r of its
                gove rnin g body should be lon g to the
                pa rti c ular re li gion or de nomination,
                T hi s mea n s that the appoi n tm e nt of the
                offi ce bea re rs in any religioll s or denominatio THlI in stitution ca n be restri cted to
                the pe rso ns of th a t pa rti cular re lig ion
                or de nomi na tion, In bri e f, th e re ligious
                qualifi cation ca n be prescribed by the
                law in th is regard.

                (d) The state is pe rmitted to make a provision for the reservat ion of upto 10% of
                a ppoin tm e nts or posts in fa vo ur of any
                e conomi c all y weak e r sec tion s. T hi s
                reservation of upto 10% would b e in
                add itio n to t he exi st in g rese rva ti on. fo r
                t hi s purpose, th e econom ica ll y wea ker
                section s wo uld be not ified by the state
                from tim e to tim e 0 11 th e ba sis of fa mily 
                in com e and oth e r indi cators of econo m ic di sad vantage.

                Th e va riou s provision s conta in ed iu Article
                16 are summari sed i n Thble 8 .4,

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 8.4
Article No.

Provisions of Article 16 (Equ ality of opportunity in matters of public employment) at a Glance
Subject Matter

16(1)

There shall be equal ity of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State.

16(2)

No citizen can be Ineligible for or discriminated against any employment or office under the State on
grounds only of religion, race. caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any of them.

16(3)

Parliament is not prevented from making any law to prescribe residence as a requirement for certal",
employment or appointment to an office under the Government of a State or Union territory, or any
local or other authority within them.

16(4)

The State Is not prevented from making any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts ,n
favour of any backward class which Is not adequately represented In the services under the State.

16(4A)

The State is not prevented from making any provision for reserva tion in matters of promotion, with
consequential seniority, in the services under the State in favour of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes which are not adequately represented In the services under the State. This provision was
added by the 77th Amendment Act, 1995. Later, the 85th Amendment Act, 2001 made a modification
in this provision by including the consequential seniority.

16(48)

The State is not prevented from considering the unfilled reserved vacancies of a year as a separate
class of vacancies to be filled up in any succeeding year or years. Further. such class of vacancies
are not to be combined with the vacancies of the year in which they are being filled up to determine
the ceiling of 50% reservation on total number of vacancies of that year. This provision was added by
the 81st Amendment Act, 2000.

16(5)

The operation of any law is not affected even though it provides that the incumbent of any rel.giovs
or denominational institution or any member of its governing body should belong to that particular
religion or denomination.

16(6)

The State is not prevented from making any provision for the reservation of upto 10% of appo:n:ments or posts in favour of any economically weaker sections. This provision was added by The 1031d
Amendment Act, 20~19~._ _ _ __
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------


            Manda i Commission and Aftermath In 1979,
            the Morarji Desa i Gove rnmen t appojnted t he
            Second 6 Bac kwa rd Cla sses Commiss ion u.n dor
            th e cha ir ma nship of B.P. Mandai, a rvle rube.r
            of Parl iame nt, in ter ms of Article 340 of the
            Con st itution to in vestiga te th e con di tion s
            of the soc iall y and edu ca tion a ll y backwa rd
            classes and suggest measures for th e ir adva nceme nt. Th e comm iss ion submitted its report in
            1980 and id e n tifi ed as many as 3743 castes as
            SOCiall y a nd edu cat iona ll y bac kward classes.
                The firs t Back ward Cla sses Co mmissio n was a p.
                poin ted in 1953 under the cha irma nslti p of Ka ka
                Ka lcl kar. It s ubmitted its report in 1955.

            They constitute nearly 52% component of the
            population, excluding the scheduled castes
            (SCs) and the scheduled tribes (STs). The
            commission recommended for reservation of
            27% government jobs for the Other Backward
            Classes (OBCs) so that the total reservation for
            al1 (SCs, STh and OBCs) amounts to 50% (In 1963, 
            the Supreme Court ruled that more than
            50% reservation of jobs in a single year would be
            unconstitutional.). It
            was after ten years in 1990 that the V.P. Singh
            Government declared reservation of 27% government jobs for the OBCs. Again in 1991,
            the Narasimha Rao Government introduced
            two changes: 
                (a) preference to the poorer sections among the OBCs in the 27% quota, i.e.,
                adoption of the economic criteria in granting
                reservation, and 

                (b) reservation of another
                10% of jobs for other economically backward
                sections who are not covered by any existing
                schemes of reservation.

            In the Indra Sawhney case (Indra Sawhney vs. Union of India (1992)), 
            also called as the MandaI case, the scope and extent
            of Article 16(4), which provides for reservation
            of jobs in favour of backward classes, has been
            examined thoroughly by the Supreme Court.
            Though the Court has rejected the additional
            reservation of 10% for other economically
            backward sections, it upheld the constitutional
            validity of 27% reservation for the OBCs with
            certain conditions, viz,
                

                (a) The advanced sections among the OBCs
                (the creamy layer) should be excluded
                from the list of beneficiaries of reservation.

                (b) No reservation in promotions; reservation
                should be confined to initial appointments .only. Any existing reservation in
                promotions can continue for five years
                only (i.e., upto 1997).

                (c) The total reserved quota should not exceed
                50% except in some extraordinary situations. 
                This rule should be applied every year.
                
                (d) The 'carry forward rule' in case of
                unfilled (backlog) vacancies is valid. But
                it should not violate 50% rule.

                (e) A permanent statutory body should be
                established to examine complaints of
                over-inclusion and under-inclusion in
                the list of OBCs.

                (f) No relaxations in qualifying marks and
                standards of evaluation in matters of
                reservation in promotions due to the
                requirement of maintenance of efficiency
                in administration under Article 335.

            With regard to the above rulings of the
            Supreme Court, the government has· taken
            the following actions:
                (a) Ram Nandan Committee was appointed
                to identify the creamy layer among the
                OBCs. It submitted its report in 1993,
                which was accepted.

                (b) National Commission for Backward
                Classes was established in 1993 by an act
                of Parliament. Its mandate was to examine
                the complaints of under-inclusion, overinclusion or non-inclusion of any class of
                citizens in the list of backward classes for
                the purpose of job reservation. Later, the
                102nd Amendment Act of 2018 conferred
                a constitutional status on the commission
                and also enlarged its functions. For this
                purpose, the amendment inserted a new
                Article 338-B in the constitution.

                (c) In order to nullify the ruling with regard
                to reservation in promotions, the 77th
                Amendment Act was enacted in 1995. It
                added a new provision in Article 16 that
                empowers the State to provide for reservation in promotions of any services
                under the State in favour of the SCs and
                STh that are not adequately represented
                in the state services. Again, the 85th
                Amendment Act of 2001 provides for
                'consequential seniority' in the case of
                promotion by virtue of rule of reservation for the government servants belonging to the SCs and STh with retrospective
                effe~t from June 1995.

                (d) The ruling with regard to backlog vacan(d)
                cies was nullified by the 81st Amendment
                Act of 2000. It added ano~he-r: new provision in Article 16 that empowers the
                State to consider the unfilled reserved
                vacancies of a year as a separate class of
                vacancies to be filled up in any succeeding 
                year or years. Further, such class of
                vaca nc ies are not to be combined with
                the vaca nci es of the year in wh ic h th ey
                are being filled up to dete rmine the ce iling of 50% reservation o n total number
                of vaca ncies of that yea r. In bri ef, it
                en ds the 50% ce iling on reservat ion in
                backlog vacanc ies.

                (e) Th e 76th Amendme nt Act of 1994 has
                placed the Thmil Nadu Reservations Ad~
                of 1993 in the Ninth Schedule to protect
                it from judicial revie w as it provided for
                69 pe r cent of reservation, far exceeding
                the 50 per ce nt ce iling.
                    - The Tamil Nadu Backword Classes, Schedu led
                    Castes a nd Scheduled Tribes (Reserva tion of seats
                    in educational insti tutio ns a nd of a ppointme nts or
                    posts in the se rvices under the sta le) Act, 1993.

                (f) In orde r to nulli fy the ru ling with rega rd
                to relaxation s in qu a lify ing marks and
                sta ndards of eva lua ti on in matte rs of
                rese rva tio n in promo tion s, the 82nd
                Amendment Act was e na cted in 2000.
                It added a n ew provisio n in Article 335
                that empowers th e sta te to make any
                provision in favour of the SCs and S15
                for re laxation in qualify ing marks or
                loweri ng th e stan dards of eva luation in
                matters of reservation in pro motions.

            Rese rvat ion fo r EWSs in Public Employment
            Th e a bove exception (d) was added by the
            I03rd Amendment Act of 2019. In order to
            g ive effect to this provis ion, the central government issued an order (i n 2019) providing
            10% rese rva tion to the Economica lly Weake r
            Section s (EWSs) in c ivi l posts and services
            in the Governm e n t of India. The be nefit of
            this reservatio n ca n be avai led by the p erso ns
            belonging to EWSs who are not cove red under
            a ny of the existing sche mes of reservation
            for SCs, S15 and OBCs. The eligibility criteria
            laid down in th is regard has already been
            ex plained under Articl e IS.

            Further; the scientifi c and technical posts
            which satisfy aU the following conditions can be
            exem pted from the purview of this reservation:

                (i) The posts should be in grades above the
                lowe r grade in Group A of the service
                co ncerned.

                (ii) They should be classified as "scie nti fic
                o r tec hni ca l in ter m s of Cabinet
                Secretariat Order ( 1961 ), according to
                which sc ientifi c and technical posts
                for which qua li fi ca tions in the natural
                sc ie n ces or exact scie n ces or applied
                scie nces or in technology a re presc ribed
                and the incumbe nts of which have to use
                t hat knowledge in the discharge of their
                duties.
                
                (iii) The posts should be for conducting
                research or for organ izing, gu iding and
                directing research .

        4. Abolition of Untouchability
            Article 17 abolishes ' unto uc habili ty' a nd
            forbids its practice in a ny form . The e nforceme nt 
            of any disability arising out of untouchability shall 
            be an offence punishab le in
            accordance with law.

            In 1976, the Untouchability (Offen ces)
            Act) 1955 has bee n co mpre hensively amended
            and renamed as the Protect ion of Civil Rights
            Act, 1955 to e n large the scope and make pena l
            provisions more stringe nt. The act defines
            civil right as any right accrui ng to a person
            by reason of the abo lition of untouchability
            by Article 17 of th e Co nst itution.

            The term 'untouchability' has not been
            defined e ither in the Co nstitution or in the
            Act . However, th e Mysore High Cou rt held
            that the subj ect matte r of Article 17 is not
            untouchability in its li tera l or grammatical
            se nse but the 'p ractice as it had developed
            hi sto rica ll y in the country'. It re fe rs to the
            soc ial disabilities imposed on ce rtain classes
            of perso ns by rea so n of their birth in ce rtain
            castes. Hence, it does not cove r social boycott
            of a few indi vidua ls or their exclusion from
            re li gious serv ices, etc.

            In the People's Union for Democratic Rights
            case ( 1982), the Supreme Court held that
            the right unde r Article 17 is avai lable against
            private individual s and it is the constitutiona l
            obligation of the State to take necessary action
            to e nsure that this right is not violated.
                - People's Union for Democratic Rights vs. Union of
                India ( 1982).


        5. Abolition of Titles
            Article 18 abolishes t itles and makes four
            provisi on s in that rega rd :
                (a) It prohibits the state from co nferring a ny
                title (excep t a military or aca dem ic di stinction) on any body, whether a citizen
                or a foreigner.

                (b) It prohibits a citizen of India from accepting any title from any fo reign sLc'lte.

                (c) A foreigner holding any office of profit or
                trust under the sta te ca nnot accept a n y
                title from any foreign state wi thout the
                co nsen t of the president.

                (d) No citizen or foreigner holdin g any office
                of profit or trust und er the State is to
                accept any prescnt, emolument or office
                from or unde r any fo reign State without
                the consent of the presiden t.

            From the above, it is cl ea r that the he reditary titl es 
            of nobility like Maharaja, Raj BahadUT, R.:1.i Ba hadur, 
            R.:,i Sa heb, Dewan Bahadur,
            etc, whi ch we re co nferred by colonia l States
            are banned by Art icl e 18 as these are agai nst
            th e princ ipl e of equal status of all.

            In th e BaJaji Raghavan case (1995), the
            Supre m e Co urt uph e ld the co nst itutional
            validit y of the Nation a l Awards- Bharat
            Ratna, Padma Vibhushan, Padma Bhushan
            and Padma Sri. It ruled that these awa rd s do
            not a mount to 'ti tles' within the meaning of
            Article 18 that prohibi ts only heredita ry titles
            of nobility. Therefore, they are not violative of
            Article 18 as th e ·the ory of equa lity does not
            mandate that merit should not b e recognised.
            However, it also ru led that they should not be
            used as suffixes or prefixes to the nam es of
            awa rdees. Otherwise, they should forfeit the
            awards.
                - Baiaji Raghavan vs. Union ofTlldia ( 1995).

            These Na tio na l Awa rds we re in stituted in
            1954. The J a nata Party government h eaded by
            Morarji Desa i discontinu ed them in 1977. But
            they were again revived in 1980 by the Indira
            Ga ndhi government.

            The Padma Awards are announced every
            year on the occassion of Republic Day excep t
            for brief interruptions durin g the years 1978
            a nd 1979 an d 1993 to 1997.

            The tota l numbe r of Padma Awards to be
            given in a yea r (excluding Posthumous awards
            a nd awards given to NRl s/Fore ign e rs/OC Is)
            should not be mo re than 120 . Similarl y, the
            number of Bharat Ratna Awa rds is restricted
            to a m ax imum of th ree in a particular yea r.

    RIGHT TO FREEDOM
        1. Protection of Six Rights
            Art icl e 19 guaran tees to all c iti ze ns the six
            rights. T h ese are:
                (i) Right to freedom of speech and expression.

                (ii) Right to asse mble peaceabl y and without
                arms.

                (iii) Ri ght to fo rm associa tion s or union s or
                co-operat ive soc ieties.
                    - Provision for "co-operative societies" was made
                    by the 97th Constitutio nal Amendment Act of 2011.
                
                (iv) Right to m ove free ly throughout th e terri tory of India.

                (v) Right to reside and settl e in any part of
                the territory of India.

                (vi) Right to practice any profession or to carry
                on a ny occupatio n , trade or business.

            Or igin a ll y, Article 19 contai n ed seve n
            rights. But, t he right to acquire, ho ld and
            di spose of property was deleted by th e 44th
            Am e ndm e nt Act of 1978.

            These six rights are protected against on ly
            state action and not private individuals. Moreover, these rights are availab1e only to the
            c iti zen s a nd to shareholde rs of a comp any
            but not to foreigners or lega l perso ns like
            co mpa nies or co rporation s, etc.

            The State can impose 'reaso nable ' restri ction s o n the enjoy m e nt of these six rights
            on ly o n the grounds m e nti oned in the Article
            19 itself a nd not on any other gro und s.

            The six rights co ntain ed in Article 19 and
            the grounds of imposing reaso nable restrictions 
            on them are mentioned in 'Table 8.5.

            Freedom of Speech and Expression It implies
            that every c itize n ha s th e right to express
            hi s/her views, opi nions, belief and conviction s
            freely by word of mouth, writing, printing, picturing 
            or in any other manner. Th e Suprem e
            Court held that the freedom of speech and
            expression includes the following:
                (a) Right to propagate one's views (Freedom
                of circulation).

                (b) Freedom of the press.
                
                (c) Freedom of commercial advertisements.
                
                (d) Right against tapping of telephonic
                conversation.
                
                (e) Right to telecast, that is, government has
                no monopoly on electronic media.
                
                (f) Right against bundh called by a political
                party or organisation.

                (g) Right to know about government ac6vities.

                (h) Freedom of silence.

                (i) Right against imposition of pre-censorship on a newspaper.

                (j) Right to demon stration or picketing but
                not right to strike.

                (k) Right to fly the national flag
                
                (l) Right of voters to know the antecedents
                of the ca ndidates contesting elections

                (m) Right to choose the medium of instruction at the stage of primary school
                
                (n) Right to ex press gender identity

                (o) Right to reply (Right to answer the
                criticis.m )

                (p) Right to post information/videos on the
                internet/social media

                (q) Right of film-makers to exhibit their films

                (r) Right to access to the internet (Right to
                access to information via the internet)

            The State can impose reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the freedom of speech
            and expression on the grounds of sovereignty
            and integrity of India, security of the state,
            friendly relations with foreign states, public
            order, decency or morality, contempt of court,
            defamation, and incitement to an offence.

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 8.5
SI No

Indian Polity

Rights under Article 19 and the Grounds of Restrictions
Rights

Grounds of Restrictions

1.

Right to freedom of speech and
expression - Article 19(1)(a)

Under Article 19(2)
(i) sovereignty and interegrity of India (added by the 16th
Amendment Act. 1963)
(Ii) security of the State
(iii) friendly relations with foreign states (added by the 1sl
Amendment Act. 1951 )
(iv) public order (added by the 1SI Amendment Act, 195 1)
(v) decency or morality
(vi) contempt of court
(vii) defamation
(viii) incitement to an offence (added by the 1st Amendment Act, 1951)

2.

Right to assemble peaceably and
without arms· Article 19(1)(b)

Under Article 19(3)
(i) sovereignty and Integrity of India (added by the 16th
Amendment Act, 1963)
(II) public order

Right to form associations or
unions or co·operatlve societies·
Article 19(1)(c)

Under Article 19(4)
(i) sovereignty and integriy of India (added by the 16th
Amendment Act, 1963)
(Ii) public order
(ill) morality

Right to move freely throughout
the territory of India· Article 19(I}(d)

Under Article 19(5)
(i) In the Interests of the general public
(ii) protection of the interests of any scheduled tribe

Right to reside and settle in any
part of the territory of India ·
Article 19(1)(e)

Under Article 19(5)
(i) in the interests of the general public
(Ii) protection of the Interests of any scheduled tribe

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

Right to acquire, hold and dispose
of property - Article 19(1)(f) (Omitted
by the 44th Amendment Act, 1978)
Right to practise any profession,
or to carry on any occupation,
trade or business· Article 19(1)(g)

Under Article 19(6)
(II In the interests of the general public
(ii) requirement of necessary professional or technical qua1lfication
(iii) Any trade, business industry or service carried on by the State to
the exclusion of citizens (added by the 1st Amendment Act, 1951)
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

            Freedom of Assembly Every citizen has
            the right to assemble peaceably and without
            arms. It includes the right to hold public
            meetings, demonstrations and take out processions. This freedom can be exercised only
            on public land and the assembly must .be
            peaceful and unarmed. This provision does
            not protect violent, disorderly, riotous assemblies, o'r one that causes breach of public
            peace or one that involves arms. This right
            does not include the right to strike.

            The State can impose reasonable restrictions on the 
            exercise of right of assembly
            on two grounds, namely, sovereignty and
            integrity of India and public order including
            the maintenance of traffic in the area
            con cent cd.

            Under Section 144 of Criminal Procedure
            Code (1973), a magistrate can restrain an
            assembly, meeting or procession if there is a
            risk of obstruction, annoyance or danger to
            human life, health or safety or a disturbance of
            the public tranqui11ity or a riot or any affray.

            Under Section 141 of the Indian Penal Code,
            as assembly of five or more persons becomes
            unlawful if the object is 
                (a) to resist the execution of any law ortegal process; 
                
                (b) to forcibly occupy the property of some person; 
                
                (c) to commit any mischief or criminal trespass; 
                
                (d) to force some person to do an illegal act; and
                
                (e) to threaten the government or its officials
                on exercising lawful powers.

            Freedom of Association All citizens have
            the right to form associations or unions or
            co-operative societies (Ibid). It includes the right
            to form political parties, companies, partnership firms, societies, clubs, organisations,
            trade unions or any body of persons. It not
            only includes the right to start an association
            or union but also to continue with the association or union as such. Further, it covers
            the negative right of not to form or join an
            association or union.

            Reasonable restrictions can be imposed
            on the exercise of this right by the State on
            the grounds of sovereignty and integrity of
            India, public order and morality. Subject
            to these restrictions, the citizens have complete liberty to form associations or unions
            for pursuing lawful objectives and purposes.
            However, the right to obtain recognition of
            the association is not a fundamental right.

            The Supreme Court held that the trade
            unions have no guaranteed right to effective bargaining or right to strike or right to
            declare a lock-out. The right to strike can be
            controlled by an appropriate industrial law.

            Freedom of Movement This freedom entitles
            every citizen to move freely throughout the
            territory of the country. ·He/ she can move
            freely from one state to another or from one
            place to another within a state. This right
            underline the idea that India is one unit so
            far as the citizens are concerned. Thus, the
            purpose is to promote national feeling and
            not parochialism.

            The grounds of imposing reasonable
            restrictions on this freedom are ,two, namely,
            the interests of general public and the protection of interests of any scheduled tribe. The
            entry of outsiders in tribal areas is restricted
            to protect the distinctive cultur:e, language,
            customs and manners of scheduled tribes and
            to safeguard their traditional vocation and
            properties against exploitation.

            The Supreme Court held that the freedom
            of mov~ment of prostitutes can be restricted
            on the ground of public health and in the
            interest of public morals. The Bombay Hjgh
            Court va1idated the restrictions on the movement 
            of persons affected by AIDS.

            The freedom of move m en t has two dimension s, 
            viz, internal ( right to move inside the
            co u n try) and externa l (right to move out of
            th e co untry and right to come ba c k to t h e
            co untry). Article 19 protec ts o nl y th e first
            dim ens io n. Th e seco nd dimension is dea lt
            by Article 21 (right to life and perso nal
            liberty).

            Freedom of Residence Every c itize n has the
            righ t to reside and settle in a ny part of the
            territory of the co untry. This right ha s two
            parts: 
                (a) the right to reside in any part of
                the coun try, whi ch mea ns to stay a t any place
                tem porarily, and 
            
                (b) the righ t to settle in any
                part o f th e country, which mean s to set up a
                hom e or dom icile at any place perman e ntly.

            This right is intended to re move in te rnal
            barri ers within the co untry or betwee n a ny
            of its parts. This promotes nat iona li sm and
            avoids narrow mind edn ess.

            The State can impose reasonable restrictions
            on the exercise of this right on two grounds,
            nam ely, the in terest of genera l publi c and the
            protectio n of interests of any schedul ed tribes.
            The rig ht of outsiders to reside a nd settle in
            tribal areas is restricted to protect the distin ctive cul ture, language, customs and ma nn ers of
            schedu led tribes and to safeguard their trad itional vocation and properties aga inst exploit.:'ltion. In many parts of the coun try, the triba ls
            have bee n pe nnitted to regulate thei r property
            rights in accordance wi th their customary rules
            and laws.

            T he Supre me Court held that ce rta in areas
            ca n be ban ned for certa in kinds of persons
            like prostitutes and ha bitual offe nd ers.

            From th e above, it is clear that the ri ght
            to resid en ce and the ri ght to move ment a re
            overlapping to some extent. Both are co mpleme ntary to each other.

            Freedom of Profess ion, etc . All citizens are
            given the right to practise any profess io n or
            to ca rryon any occupation, trade or busin ess.
            This righ t is ve ry ,vide as it covers all the
            mean s of ea rning o ne's livelihood.

            Th e Sta te ca n impose reasonable restrictions 
            o n the exercise of this right in the
            inte rest of the general publi c. Further, the
            state is empowered to:
                (a) prescribe profession a l or techni ca l qual ificat ions necessa ry for practising any
                pro fessio n o r ca rry ing o n any occupation, trade or business; a nd

                (b) carryo n by itself any trade, bu siness,
                indu stry or serv ice whether to the excl usion (co mpl ete or partial) of citizens or
                otherwise.

            Thus, no obj ection ca n be made when the
            State carri es on a trade, b usi ness, industry or
            service ei ther as a monopoly (co mplete or pa rtial) to the excl usio n of citizens (a ll o r so me
            only) or in com pet iti o n \vith a ny cit ize n. The
            State is not requ ired to justi fy its monopoly.

            Thi s right does not incl ude the righ t to
            carry on a profeSSion or business or trade or
            occupation that is immoral (trafficking in
            wom en or children) or dangerous (harmfu l drugs
            or explosives, etc,). The StHte ca n absolute ly
            prohibit these or regu late them through licencing.

            In Anuradha Bhasin case (2020), the Supre me 
            court held thilt the freedom to pract ice
            any profession or ca rryon any trade, bu siness
            or occupation ove r the medium of internet
            enjoys co n stitutio n a l protec ti o n und er
            Articl e 19(1 )(g). T he restriction on this right
            shou ld be in co nso nance with the ma ndate
            under Article 19(6), inclu sive of the test of
            proportionality. Furth er, a n orde r suspe ndi ng
            internet services indefinitely is impermissible
            under th e Temporary Suspe nsion of,Teleco m
            Se rvices (Publi c Emergency o r Publi c Safety)
            Rules, 2017.
                - Anuradha Bhasin vs. Union of India (2020).

        2. Protection in Respect of Conviction for Offences

            Article 20 gra nts protection agai nst arbitrary
            and excess ive punishment to a n acc used
            perso n , whether citize n or foreigner or lega I
            perso n like a co mpa ny or a corporat ion. It
            co ntain s three provisions in tha t direction:

                (a) No eX-/Jost-facto law: No person s hall
                be 
                    (i) con victed of any offence except
                for vio lation of a law in force a t th e
                time of the comm ission of the act, nor

                    (ii) subjec ted to a penal ty greate r than
                    that prescr ibed by the law in force at
                    the time of the co mmis sion of the act.

                (b) No doubl e jeopar dy: No person shall be
                prosec uted and punis hed for the same
                offenc e more than once.

                (c) No self-in crimin ation: No person accused
                of any offenc e shaH be comp elled to be
                a witne ss again st him self/h erself.

            An ex-past-facto law is one that impos es
            penal ties retros pectiv ely (retro active ly), that
            is, upon acts alread y done or which increa ses
            the penal ties for such acts. The enact ment
            of such a law is prohib ited by the first provision of Articl e 20. However, this limita tion
            is imposed only on crimi nal laws and not
            on civil laws or tax laws. In other words, a
            civil liabili ty or a tax can be imposed retrospectively. Furthe r, this provis ion prohib its
            only convi ction or senten ce under an cx-postfacto cr imina l law and not the trial thereo f.
            Finall y, the protection (imm unity ) under
            this provis ion ca nnot be claim ed in case of
            preven tive deten tion or dema nding securi ty
            from a person .

            The protec tion again st doubl e jeopa rdy is
            availa ble only in proce eding s before a court
            of law or a judicial tribun al. In other words, it
            is not availa ble in procee dings before depart m ental or admin istrati ve autho rities as they
            are not of judici al nature.

            The protec tion agains t self-in crimin ation
            extend s to both oral eviden ce and docum entary evide nce. 
            However, it does not extend to 
                (i) co mpuls ory produ ction of mater ial
                objec ts, 

                (ii) co mpul sion to give thum b
                impre ssion, specim en signat ure, blood specimens, and 

                (iii) comp ulsory exhib ition of the
                body. 
            Furthe r, it extend s only to crimin al
            proce edings and not to civil procee dings or
            proceedings which are not of crimin al nature .

        3. Prote ction of Life and Perso nal Liber ty

            Articl e 21 declar es that no person shall be
            depriv ed of his/ her life or person al liberty
            excep t accord ing to proced ure establ ished by
            law. This right is availa ble to both citize ns
            and non-c itizen s.

            In the famou s Gopalal1 case (A K Gopalan vs. Sta te of Madras ( 1950)), the
            Supreme Court has taken a narrow interp retation of the Article 21. It held that the protec tion
            under Article 21 is available only agains t arbitrary executive action and not from arbitr ary
            legislative action. This means that the State can
            deprive the right to life and person al liberty
            of a person based on a law. This is becau se
            of the expres sion 'proce dure establ ished by
            law' in Article 21, which is differe nt from the
            expression 'due process of law' contai ned in the
            Ameri can Const itution . Hence, the va lidity of
            a law that has prescr ibed a proced ure canno t
            be questi oned on the groun d that the law is
            unreas onabl e, unfair or unjust . Secondly, the
            Supre me Court held that the 'perso nal liberty '
            means only liberty relatin g to the person or
            body of the indivi dual. But, in Maneka case (Maneka Gandhi vs. Union of India (1978))
            (1978), the Supre me Court overru led its judgement in the Gopalan case by taking a wider
            interp retatio n of the Article 21. Therefore, it
            ruled that the right to life and person al liberty
            of a person can be deprived by a law provid ed
            the proced ure prescr ibed by that law is reasonable, fair and just and not arbitra ry, fanciful
            or oppressive. In order that the proced ure is
            reasonable, fair and just, the proced ure should
            confo nn to the princi ples of Nnatural justice
            In other words, it has introd uced the Ameri can
            expression 'due process of law'. In effect, the
            protec tion under Article 21 should be available
            not only agains t arbitr ary executive action
            but also agains t arbitr ary legislative action .
            Further, the court held that the 'right to life' as
            embod ied in Artic1e 21 is not merel y confin ed
            to anima l existe nce or survival but it includ es
            within its ambit the right to live with huma n
            dignit y and a11 those aspects of life which go to
            make a man's life meani ngful, compl ete and
            worth living. It also ruled that the expres sion
            'Personal Liberty' in Article 21 is of the widest
            ampli tude and it covers a variet y of rights that
            go to consti tute the person al liberti es ofa man.

            The Supreme Co u rt ha s reaffirmed its
            judgemen t in the Malleka case in the subseq ue n t cases. 
            It has declared the fo ll owi ng rights as part of Article 21:

                (1) Right to live with human dignity.

                (2) Right to dece nt environme n t in du din g
                pollu tion free water and air a nd protectio n aga inst hazardo us indu str ies.
                
                (3) Right to li ve lih ood.
                
                (4) Ri ght to priva cy.
                
                (S) Right to sh elter.
                
                (6) Ri ght to hea lth.
                
                (7) Right to free edu cation up to 14 years of
                age.
                
                (8) Right to free lega l aid.
                
                (9) Right aga in st so litary co nfin ement.
                
                (10) Right to speedy tria l.
                
                (11) Righ t against hand cuffing.
                
                (12) Right agai nst inhuman treatme nt.
                
                (13) Right agai nst delayed execution.
                
                (14) Right to travel abroad.
                
                (15) Right against bonded labour.
                
                (16) Right agai nst custodial harassment.
                
                (17) Rig ht to emergency medica l aid ( Ri ght
                to Doctor's ass ista nce).
                
                (18) Right to tim ely medical treatment in
                government hospital.
                
                (19) Right not to be d rive n out of a sta te.
                
                (20) Right to fair tria l.
                
                (21) R.ight of prisoner to have necessities of life.
                
                (22) Rig h t of wo m e n to be treated with
                decency an d di gn ity.
                
                (23) Rig ht aga in st publ ic ha nging.
                
                (24) Right to road in hill y areas.
                
                (25) Right to information.
                
                (26) Right to reputation.
                
                (27) Right of appea l fro m a judgem ent of
                co n viction
                
                (28) Right to family pe nsio n
                
                (29) Right to social and eco nomic j ustice and
                e mpowerment
                
                (30) Right agai nst ba r fetters
                
                (31) Right to appropri ate life in sura nce policy
                
                (32) Right to sleep
                
                (33) Ri ght to freedom from no ise po ll ution
                
                (34) Ri ght to suswi nable deve lo pm en t
                
                (35) Ri gh t to opportunity.
                
                (36) Ri gh t to decent burial/cremation

                (37) Right to marry a person of one's c hoi ce
                
                (38) Right to di e with dignit y ( pass ive
                e uthanasia)

            The important cases relating to th e expansion 
            of the sco pe of Article 21 ( Protect ion of
            Life and Personal Lib erty) are mentioned in
            Thb le 8.6.

        4. Right to Education
            Article 21A declares that the State sha ll provi de free a nd co mpul sory educatio n to a ll
            ch il dren of the age of six to fou rtee n yea rs in
            suc h a manner as the State may determine.
            Thu s, this provision makes on ly eleme ntary
            ed ucation a Fundame ntal Right an d n ot
            high er or professio nal education .

            T h is provis ion was added by the 86th
            Const itutional Amend me nt Act of 2002. Thi s
            amendme nt is a major m il estone in the country's a im to achi eve 'Educatio n for All'. Th e
            government desc ribed this step as 'the dawn
            of the seco nd revo lution in the c hapter of
            citizens' rights'.

            Even befo re this a mendment, the Co nst itution 
            contained a prov isio n for free and co mpulsory 
            ed ucat ion for c hil d ren und er Art icle 45
            in Part IV. However, being a directi ve princip le, 
            it was not e nforceabl e by the courts.
            Now, there is sco pe for judicial intervention
            in thi s reg<lrd.

            This amendme nt cha nged the subject matter of A.rticle 45 in directive principles. It now
            reads-'The st..,1te shil ll endeavou r to provide
            ea rl y childhood care and ed ucation for a ll children unti l they co mplete the age of six years:
            It also added a ncw fun da mental duty under
            Article 51A that reads-' It shall be the duty of
            every citizcn of India to provide opportunitics
            for education to his child or wa rd between the
            age of six and fourteen years'.

            In Unni Krishnan case (Unni Krishnan vs. State of Andhra Pradesh, 1993) 
            itself, the Su preme Court recog ni sed a F'u nda mclllal
            Right to p rim ary edu cation in thc right to
            life under Article 21. It held that eve ry c hild
            has a right to free ed ucation until he/ she
            completes the age of 14 years. Thereafter, his/
            her right to education is subject to the limits
            of economic capacity and development of the
            state. In this judgement, the Court overruled
            its earlier judgement delivered in Mohini Jain
            case (Mohini Jain vs. State of Karnataka, 1992) 
            wherein it partly declared that
            there was a fundamental right to education up
            to any level including professional education
            like medicine and engineering.

            In pursuance of Article 21A, the Parliament enacted 
            the Right of Children to Free
            and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009.
            This Act seeks to provide that every child has
            a right to be provided full time elemen tary
            education of satisfactory and equitable quality 
            in a formal school which satisfies certain
            essential norms and standards. This legislation 
            is anchored in the belief that the values
            of equality, social justice and democracy and
            the creation of a just and humane society
            can be achieved only through provlSlQn of
            inclusive elementary education to all.

            The Constitution (EightY-Sixth amendment) Act, 
            2002 and the Right of Ch ildren
            to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009
            have come into force w.e.f. 1 April 2010.

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 8.6
SI No

Rights~, 91

Important cases expanding the scope of Article 21 (Protection of life and personal liberty)
Case (Year)

Right declared by the Supreme Court as
an mtegral pari of Article 21

1.

Satwant Singh Sawhney liS. Dr. Ramaratnam,
Assistant Passport Officer (1967)

2

M.H. Hoske! liS. State of Maharashtra (1978)

Right to free legal aid

3.

Hussalnara Khatoon \IS. Home Secretary, Bihar (1979)

Right to speedy trial

4.

Francis Coralie Mullin liS. Administrator, Oelhi (1981)

RighI to live with human d ignity & Right of

Right to travel abroad

prisoner to have necessities of life

5.

Sheela Barse liS. State of Maharashtra (1983)

Righi against custodial harassment

6.

Rural litigation and Entitlement Kendra vs. State of

Right to decent envIronment

Uttar Pradesh (1985)

•

_.

7.

Olga Tellis vs. Bombay Municipal Corporation (1985)

Right to livelihood

8.

Parmanand Katara vs. Union of India (1989)

Right to emergency medical aid (Right to
Doctor's assistance)

9.

Shantistar Builders vs. N.K. Totame (1990)

Right to shelter

10.

K.S. Puttaswamy vs. Union of India (2017)

Right to privacy

11.

Common Cause (A Regd. Society) vs. Union of India (2018)

Right to die with dignity (Passive euthanasia)
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

        5. Protection Against Arrest and Detention

            Article 22 grants protection to persons who
            are arrested or detained. Detention is of two
            types, namely, punitive and preventive. Punitive detention is to punish a person for an
            offence committed by him / her after trial and
            conviction in a court. Preventive deten tion ,
            on the other h and, means detention of a person without trial and conviction by a court. Its
            purpose is not to punish a person for a past
            offence but to prevent him / her from committing an offence in the near future. Thus,
            preventive detention is only a precautionary
            measure and based on suspicio n.

            T he Arti cl e 22 has two parts-t he fi rst part
            dea ls wi th the cases of o rd inary law and t he
            second part deals with the cases of pre\'e n tive
            detent ion law.
            (<I) The fi rst part of Article 22 co n fe rs the following rights on a person who is a rrested
            or deta ined under a n ordi na ry law:
            (i) Ri ght to be in formed of the groun ds
            of a rrest.
            (ii) Right to consu lt and be defended by
            a legal p ractit ion er.
            (iii) Right to be produced befo re a magistrate within 24 hours, excl ud ing
            the journ ey time.
            (iv) Ri ght to be re leased afte r 24 hours
            unl ess the mag istrate a uthorises
            furt he r detent io n .

            These safegua rds are not avail abl e to
            an enemy a li en or a person arrested or
            deta ined un der a preventive detention law.
            The Supre me Court also ru led that the
            a rrest a nd dete nt ion in the first part of
            Article 22 do not cover arrest under t he
            orders of a court, c ivil arrest, arrest on £1.ilure to pay the income tax, a nd deportation
            of a n alien. They a pply on ly to a n act of a
            crimi nal or quasi-cri m inal nature or some
            activ ity prej udi cia l to publi c interest.

            (b) The seco nd part of Arti cle 22 gran ts protectio n to pe rsons who arc arrested or
            detai ned u nder a preve n tive detention
            law. Th is protection is ava ilab le to both
            cit ize n s as we ll as a li e ns a nd in cl ud es
            the fo ll owi ng:
            (i) T he detent ion of a perso n cannot
            exceed t h ree mo nth s u n less an
            adv isory boa rd reports suffic ie n t
            cause fo r extended detentio n . The
            board is to co nsist of j udges of a
            hi gh cou rt.
            (ii) T he grounds of de tentio n shou ld
            be comm un icated to t he detenu.
            However, th e facts considered to be
            aga inst the public in terest need not
            be disclosed.
            (iii) T he dete nu shou ld be <lffordcd a n
            o pportu ni ty to ma ke a represen tation against the detention order.

            Article 22 a lso a ut horises t he Pa rl ia ment to
            prescri be (a) the circu msta nces and the classes
            of cases in wh ich a person can be det,1. ined for
            more than th ree months under a preven ti ve
            detention law with out obta ini ng the opi n ion of
            a n advisory board; (b) the maximum period fo r
            whi ch a person ca n be deta in ed in any classes
            of cases under a preventive dete ntion law; and
            (c) the procedu re to be fo llowed by an advisory
            boa rd in an enqui ry.
            T he 44 th A me n dme n t Act of 1978 has
            red uced the pe ri od of deten tio n witho ut obta ining the o pinion of an advisory board fro m
            t hree to two mon ths. However, this provision
            has not yet bee n brought into force, he ncc, the
            original period of three months still co ntinues.
            T he Co nstitution has di vided the legislative power wit h regard to preve n t ivc de te ntion between th e Pa rli a me n t an d th e state
            leg isla tures. The Parl iament has exclusive
            autho ri ty to make a law of preve n tive detentio n for reaso n s co n nec ted wi th defe n ce,
            fore ign affa irs a nd the sec urity of Ind ia. Both
            the Pa rl iament as well asthe sta te leg islat ures can co nc urre n tl y make a law ofp reve nl ive de tent ion fo r reaso ns co nn ected wi th the
            security ofa state, the ma in tenance of pub lic
            order a nd the main te na nce of su ppl ies and
            se rvices essen ti a l to the co m m uni ty.
            The preventive dete ntio n laws made by the
            Par lia ment are:
            (a) Preve n tive Detent ion Act, 1950. Expired
            in 1969.
            (b) Ma intenance of In ternal Secu rity Act
            (M ISA), 1971. Repcil lcd in 1978.
            (e) Co nse rvatio n of Fo re ign Exchan ge and
            Preve ntion of Sm uggli ng Act ivities Act
            (COFEPOSA), 1974.
            (d) Na t io na l Secur ity Act (NASA), 1980.
            (e) Preve n tion of Bl ack m a rk et in g and
            Ma intenance of Su pp li es of Esse n t ial
            Co mm odit ies Act ( PBMSECA), 1980.
            (f) Te rro ri st a n d Di sr u p t ive Act ivi ti es
            (Prevent io n) Act (l'A DA), 1985. Re pea led
            in 1995.
            (g) Preve ntion of Ill icit Traffic in N<l rcotic
            Drugs an d Psychotro p ic Substa n ces Act
            (PITND PSA), 1988.

            (h) Preve ntion ofThrrorism Act (POTA), 2002.
            Re pealed in 2004.
            (i) Unlawful Activities ( Preve ntion) Act

            (UAPA), 1967, as amended in 2004, 2008,
            2012 and 2019.
            It is unfortunate to know that no democratic country in the world has made preventive detention as an integral part of the
            Constitution as has bee n do ne in India. It is
            unknown in USA. It was resorted to in Britain only during first and seco nd world war
            time. In India, preventive detention existed
            even during the British rule. For example, the
            Bengal State Prison ers Regul ation of 1818 and
            the Defe nce of India Act of 1939 provided for
            preventive detention.

    RIGHT AGAINST EXPLOITATION
        1. Prohibition of Traffic in Human Beings and Forced Labour

            Article 23 prohibits traffic in human beings,
            begar (forced labour) and other similar forms
            of forced labour. Any co ntrave ntion of this
            provision sha ll bea n offence punishable in
            accordan ce with law. This right is available
            to both citize ns and non-citizen s. It protects
            the individual not only against the State but
            also against private perso ns.
            The expression 'traffic in human beings'
            include (a) selling and buy ing of men , women
            and children like goods; (b) immoral traffic in
            women and children, including prostitution;
            (c) devadasis; and (d) slavery. 1b punish these
            acts, the Parliament has implemented the
            ImmoralTTaffi c (Prevention ) Act l 3, 1956.
                - Originally known as the Su ppression of Immora l
                Traffic in Wom en a nd Girls Act, 1956.
            The term ' bega r' m ea ns co mpulsory wo rk
            without remuneration. It was a peculi ar
            Indian syste m under which the loca l za mindars sometimes used to force their tenants
            to render se rvices without any payment. In
            addition to begar, the Article 23 prohibits
            other 'similar form s of forced labour ' like
            'bonded la bour '. Th e term ' forced la bour'
            mea n s co mpelling a person to work against
            his/h er will. The word 'force' includ es not
            only physical or lega l force but also force
            arising from the co mpul sion of economic
            circumstances, that is, working fo r le ss
            than the minimum wage. In this regard, the
            Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976;
            the Minimum Wages Act, 1948; the Co ntract
            Labou r Act, 1970 and the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 were made.
            Article 23 also provides for an exception to
            this provision. It permits the State to impose
            compulsory se rvice fo r public purposes, as
            for exampl e, military service or social serv ice,
            for which it is not bound to pay. Howeve r, in
            imposing such service, the Sta te is not permitted to make any di scrimination on grounds
            only of religion, race, caste or class.

            fli

        2. Prohibition of Employment of Children in Factories, etc.

            Articl e 24 prohibits the employment of children below the age of 14 yea rs in any fa ctory, min e or other haza rdous activities like
            construction work or railway. But it does not
            prohibit their employment in any h arml ess
            or innoce nt work.
            The Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, is the most important law in
            this direction. In addition, the Employment of
            Children Act, 1938; the Factories Act, 1948; the
            Mines Act, 1952; the Merchant Shipping Act,
            1958; the Plantation Labour Act, 1951; the Motor
            Transport Workers Act, 1951; Apprentices Act,
            1961; the Bidi and Cigar Workers Act, 1966; and
            other similar acts prohibit the employment of
            children below certain age.
            In 1996, the Supreme Co urt directed the
            establishm ent of Child Labour Rehabilitation Welfare Fund in which the offending
            employe r should depos it a fine of t20,OOO
            for each child employed by him / her. It also
            issued directions for the improvement of
            education, hea lth and nutrition of children.
            The Co mmi ssions for Protection of Child
            Rights Act, 2005 was enacted to provide for the
            establishme nt of a National Commission and
            State Co mmissions for Protection of Child
            Rights and Childre n' s Courts for providing
            speed y tr ia l of offences against children o r
            of vio latio n of c hild ri ghts.
            In 2006, t h e governme n t banned the
            employment of chi ldren as dom es ti c serva nts
            or worke rs in b usi ness estab li shm ents like
            hote ls, dha bas, restaurants, sho ps, fa ctories,
            reso rts, s pa s, tea-s hops <l11el so 011. It warned
            that a nyo ne em ployi ng child re n below 14
            years of age wou ld be liab le for prosec u tion
            and pe na l actio n.
            The Child Labour ( Prohibition a nd Regulat ion) Amendment Act, 20 16, amended the
            Chi ld Labour (P rohibiti o n and Regu lat io n )
            Act, 1986. It has renamed th e Prin c ipal Act as
            the Child and Adolescent Labou r (Pro hibitio n
            and Regulario n) Act, 1986.

    
    RIGHT TO fREEDOM OF RELIGION

        1. Freedom of Conscience and Free Profession , Practice and Propagation of Religion

            Article 25 says that a ll persons are equall y
            e ntitl ed to freedom of co nscie nce and t he
            rig ht to freel y p rofess, practice a nd propagate
            reli gio n . T he impli ca ti o ns of these are:
            ( ;:1) Freedom o{collscicllce: In ner freedom of
            a n ind ivid ual to mould hi s / h e r re la tion

            with God or Creat ures in whatever way
            hel she desires.
            ( b) Right to profess: Decl aration of one's religious heliefs and f(li th openl y and freely.
            (e) Right 10 practice: Performance of religious

            worship, ritual s, ce re m onies and exh ib ition of beliefs a nd ideas.
            (d ) Rig"t to propagate: 'Tran sm iss ion a nd d isse mina tion of one's re li g ious be li efs
            to ot hers or exposit io n of th e tcnets of
            o ne's re lig io n . But, it does not iu clude
            a right to conve rt a noth e r person to
            one's own religion. Forcible co n versions
            impinge o n t he 'freedom of co nscie nce'
            guara nteed to a ll the persons alike.
            Fro m the above, it is clear that Articl e 25
            cove rs not on ly relig iolls bel iefs (doctrines)

            bu t a lso reli g iou s pra cti ces (rit ua ls). Moreove r, these rig hts are availab le to a ll personscitize ns as well as non-citi zens.
            Howeve r, these r ights arc s ubject to pu bli c
            ord e r, mora lity, hea lth a nd ot he r provis io ns
            rela ting to fundamenta l rights. Further, t he
            St<lte is per m itted to:
            (a) regul ate or restri ct any eco no mi c, financia l, po liti ca l or Olher secular activity
            assoc iated with re ligious practi ce; a nd
            (b) p rov id e for soc ia l welfare a nd reform o r
            throw o pe n I-l ind u religiou s in stit uti ons
            of a publ ic chara cter to a ll cla sses a nd
            sec tion s of 1-1 in d us.
            Art icle 25 also co ntains two ex planations:
            o ne, wear in g and carry ing of k ;IJJWIS is to be
            in cl uded in the profession of the Sikh religion;
            and two, the Hindu s, in t hi s co ntext , in cl ude
            Sik hs, Jain s a nd Buddhists.
                - 1n th is clause, the reference to Hindus sha lll>e construed
                as including a reference to persons professing the Sikh, 
                Jaina and Buddh ist relig ion a nd the
                reference to Hindu relig ious in stitutions shall be
                construed accord ingly (Article 25).

        2. Freedom to Manage Re ligious Affairs
            Accordi n g to Art ic le 26, every reli gio us
            de nomi nation o r any of its sectio n shall have
            the following rights:
            (a) Right to estab li sh and maintain in stitutions for religious a nd charit.:1ble purposes;
            (b) Right to manage its own affairs in matters
            of religio n;
            ( c) Right to own ,mel acquire movab le an d
            immovab le property; and
            (d ) Right to admi n ister s uc h property in
            accorda nce with Imv.
            Art icle 25 guarantees r igh ts of individua ls,
            whil e Art icl e 26 guara ntees righ ts of relig iou s
            deno min a ti ons or the ir secti o ns. In o th er
            words, Article 26 protects co ll ecti ve freedo m
            of re ligion. Like the rights u nd er Art icle 25,
            the rights unde r Article 26 are a lso su bject
            to pu bli c o rd e r, mora l ity and hea lth but not
            su bject to o ther provisions re lat i ng to t he
            Fundam e ntal Rights.

            The Supreme Court held that a religious
            denomin atio n must satisfy three co nditions:
            (a) It sh ould be a collect ion of individu als
            who have a system of beli efs (doctrin es)
            which they regard as co ndu cive to their
            spiritual well-being;
            (b) It should have a comm on orga nisatio n ;
            and
            ( c) It should be designated by a dist in ctive
            name.
            Under th e above criteria, the Supreme Court
            held that the 'Ramakrishna Mission' and 'Ananda
            Marga' are religious denominations within the
            Hindu religio n. It also h eld thatAurobindo
            Society is not a reJigjous denomination.

        3. Freedom from Taxation fur Promotion 'o f a Religion

            Article 27 lays down that no person sh all be
            com pell ed to pay any taxes for the promotio n
            or ma intena n ce of a ny particular religion
            or religious denomination. In other words,
            the State shoul d n ot spend the public money
            coll ected by way of tax for the promotion or
            maintena n ce of any parti cular religion . Thi s
            provision prohibits the State from favouring,
            patronising and supporting one religion over
            the other. This mean s that the taxes ca n be
            used for the promotion or mai ntena n ce of
            all religions.
            This prov ision prohibits only levy of a tax
            and not a fee. This is beca use the purpose of
            a fee is to control secular admin istration of
            religious instituti on s an d n ot to promote or
            m ai ntain religion. Thus, a fee ca n be lev ied
            on pilgrims to provi de them so me special
            se rvice or safety measures. Similarly, a fee
            ca n be levied on religious e ndowm ents for
            meeting the regllia tio n expen diture.

        4. Freedom from Attending Religious Instr uction

            Under Article 28, n o religiou s instru ction
            sh a ll be provided in any edu cat iona l institution wholl y maintain ed out of State funds.
            However, th is provision sh all not apply to an
            educationa l institution ad mini stered by the
            State but establish ed under any endOlvment
            or trust, requiring imparting of religio us
            instruction in such institut ion .
            Further, no perso n attending any educati onal institution recognised by the Sta te
            or receivi n g a id out of State funds sha ll be
            required to attend a ny reli gious instruction
            or worship in that instituti o n without hi s/
            her consent. In case of a minor, the co nse nt
            of his/ h er guardi an is needed.
            Thus, Article 28 distinguishes betw'ee n four
            types of educationa l institution s:

                (a) Institutions wh olly ma intai n ed by the
                State.

                (b) Institutions administered by the State but
                established under any endowment or trust.
                
                (c) Institutions recognised by the State.
                
                (d) Institutions receiving ai d from the State.

            In (a), religious instruction is comp lete ly
            prohibited while in (b ), religious instruction is permitted. In (c) a nd (d), religious
            instru ct ion is permitted on ·a voluntary basis.

    CULTURAL AND EDUCATIONAL RIGHTS

        1. Protection of Interests of Minori t ies
            Article 29 provides that a ny section of the
            citizens residing in any part of India havin g a
            distinct language, script or culture of its own,
            shall have the right to co nserve the sa m e.
            Further, no citizen sh all be denied admission
            into any educat ion al institution ma inta ined
            by the State or receiving aid out of State funds
            o n grounds only of religion, race, caste, or
            language.

            The first provision protects the right of a
            group while the second proviSion guarantees
            the right of a citizen as an individual irrespective of the community to wh ich he/she belongs.
            Article 29 grants protectio n to both religious min o rities as well as linguistic minorities. However, the Supreme Court held that
            the scope of this article is not necessa rily
            rest ricted to minorities only, as it is commonl y assumed to be. This is beca use of the
            use of words 'section of citizens' in the Article
            that include minorities as well as majority.

            The Supreme Court also held that the right
            to conserve the la nguage includes the right to
            agi tate for the protection of the language. Hence,
            the pol itical speeches or prom ises made for the
            conservation of the language of a section of the
            citizens does not amoun t to corru pt practice
            under tJle Representation of the People Act, 1951 .

        2. Right of Minorities to Establish and Administer Educational Institutions

            Artic le 30 grants th e following rig h ts to
            min or ities, whether rel igious or linguistic:
                (a) All m inorities sha ll have the right to
                estab lish and administer educational
                in stitutions of the ir choice.
                
                ( b) The co mpen sat ion amo unt fixed by th e
                State for th e co m pulso ry acquisition
                of any property of a mi nor ity educational institution shall not restri ct or
                abrogate the right guaranteed to them .
                This provision was added by the 44th
                Amendment Act of 1978 to protect the
                r ight of m in orit ies in thi s regard. The
                Act deleted the right to property as a
                Fundamental Right (A rticle 31).
                
                ( c) In granting aid, the State sha ll no t di scrimin ate aga inst any educational institution managed by a mi nority.
            
            Thus, the protection under Article 30 is
            confined on ly to mino r ities (relig ious or li nguistic) and docs not exte nd to any section
            of citizens (as under Article 29). However,
            the term ' m ino rity ' has n ot bee n defi ned
            <ll1y where in the Co nstitution.

            The right unde r Article 30 also includes
            the right of a m inority to impart education
            to its children in its own language.
            Mi nor ity ed ucatio nal institutio ns are of
            three ty pes:
                (a) institutions th(l1 seek recogn ition as well
                as aid from the State;
            
                (b) in stitutions that seek on ly recogn ition
                from the State a nd not aid; and
            
                ( c) institutions that neith er seek recognition
                no r aid from the State.

            The institution s of first and second type
            a re subject to the regu latory power of the sta te
            with regard to syllab us prescription, academic
            standards, discipline, sanitation, employm ent
            of teach ing staff and so on. The institutions of
            thi rd type arc free to adm ini ster their affairs
            b ut subject to operatio n of ge ne ra l laws like
            contract law, la bour law, industrial law, tax
            law, economic regulations, and so on.

            In a judgement de li vered in the Secretary
            of Malankara Syrian Ca tholic College case (Secretary of the Malankara Syrian Catholic College vs T. Jose, 2006)
            (2 006), t he Sup reme Co u rt has su mmar ized
            th e genera l prin cip les re lat ing to esta bl ishment and adm inistration of minority educa tiona l institut ions in th e fo ll ow in g way:
            
                1. The right of minorities to estab lish a nd
                admi n ister educational institutions of
                their choi ce co mprises the following
                rights:

                    (i) To choose its governing body in
                    whom the founders of the institutio n have faith and confidence to
                    condu ct and manage the affairs of
                    the institution;

                    (ii) To appoint teachi ng staff (teac he rs/ lecturers and head-m aste rs/
                    p rincipa ls) as a lso non-teach ing
                    sta ff; and to take action if there is
                    dere liction of d uty on the part of
                    any of its emp loyees;

                    ( iii) Th admit elig ible students of the ir
                    choice and to set up a rea sonable
                    fee structu re; and

                    (iv) 1b use its properties and assets for
                    the benefit of the institut ion.

                2. The right co nferred on minorities under
                Articl e 30 is on ly to ensure eq ua lity with
                the majority and not intended to place
                the m inorities in a more advantageous
                position vis-a-vis th e majority. There is
                no reverse discrimination in favour of
                m inorities. The genera l laws of the laud
                relating to nationa l interest, nationa l
                sec urity, socia l welfare, publi c order,
                mora li ty, h ea lth, sa ni tat io n , taxa tion
                etc., appli cable to all, will equa lly apply
                to mi nority institutions also.

                3 . The right to estab li sh and administer
                educational institutions is not absoiuce.
                Nor does it include the right to mal~
                administer. There can be regulatory
                measures for ensuring educational
                character and standards and maintain~
                ing academic excellence. There can be
                checks on administration as are necessary to ensure that the administration
                is efficient and sound, so as to serve
                the .academic needs of the institution.
                Regulations made by the State concerning generally the welfare of students
                and teachers, regulations laying dOl'm
                eligibility criteria and qualifications
                for appointment, as also conditions of
                service of employees (both teaching and
                non ~ teaching), regulations to prevent
                exploitation or oppression of employees,
                and regulations prescribing syllabus
                and curriculum of study fall under this
                category. Such regulations do not in any
                manner interfere with the right under
                Article 30(1).
                
                4. Subject to the eligibility conditions/qualifications prescribed by the State being
                met, the unaided minority educational
                institutions will have the freedom to
                appoint teachers/ lecturers by adopting
                any rational procedure of selection.

                5. Extention of aid by the State, does not
                alter the nature and character of the
                minority educational institutions. The
                condi tions can be imposed by the State
                to ensure proper utilization of the aid,
                without however diluting or abridging
                the right under Article 30(1).

    RICHTTO CONSTITUTIONAL REMEDIES
        A mere declaration of fundamental rights
        in the Constitution is meaningless, useless
        and worthless without providing an effective machinery for their enforcement, if
        and when they are violated. Hence, Article
        32 confers the right to remedies for the
        enforcement of the fundamental rights of an
        aggrieved citizen. In other words, the right
        to get the Fundamental Rights protected is
        in itself a fundamental right. This makes
        the fundamental rights real. That is why
        Dr. A~bedkar called Article 32 as the most
        important article of the Constitution-'an
        Article without which this constitution would
        be a nullity. It is the very soul of the Constitution and the very heart of it'. The Supreme
        Court has ruled that Article 32 is a basic
        feature of the Constitution. Hence, it cannot
        be abridged or taken away even by way of an
        amendment to the Constitution. It contains
        the following four provisions:
            (a) The right to move the Supreme Court by
            appropriate proceedings for the enforce~
            ment of the Fundamental Rights is
            . guaranteed.

            (b) The Supreme Court shall have power to
            issue directions or orders or writs for the
            enforcement of any of the fundamental
            rights. The writs issued may include
            habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition,
            certiorari and quo-warranto.
            
            (c) Parliament can empower any other court
            to issue directions, orders and writs of
            all kinds. However, this can be done
            without prejudice to the above powers
            conferred on the Supreme Court. Any
            other court here does not include high
            courts because Article 226 has already
            conferred these powers on the high
            courts.
            
            (d) The right to move the Supreme Court
            shall not be suspended except as otherwise provided for by the Constitution.
            Thus the Constitution provides that the
            President can suspend the right to move
            any court for the enforcement of the
            fundamental rights during a national
            emergency (Article 359).

        It is thus clear that the Supreme Court
        has been constituted as the defender and
        guarantor of the fundamental rights of the (
        citizens. It has been vested with the 'original'
        and 'wide' powers for that purpose. Original,
        because an aggrieved citizen can directly
        go to the Supreme Court, not necessarily by
        way of appeal. Wide, because its power is not
        restricted to issuing of orders or directions
        but also writs of all kinds.

        The purpo se of Articl e 32 is to provid e a
        guara nteed , effecti ve, ex pediti ous, inexp cn·
        sive and summ ary remed y for t he protec tion
        of the funda menta l rights . On ly the FUndamenta l Rights guara nteed by the Cons titution can be e n forced under Articl e 32 and
        not any other right like non -fund amen ta l
        const itutio nal rights , statut ory rights , c ustomar y rights and so on. Th e violat ion of a
        funda menta l right is t he sine qua 11017 for the
        exerc ise of the right confe rred by Articl e 32.
        In other words, the Su preme Court , under
        Articl e 32, ca nn ot determ in e a questi on that
        does not in volve Fu ndam enta l Rights. Articl e
        32 canno t be invok ed simply to determ ine the
        const it utiona li ty of an execu ti ve order or a
        leg islatio n unl ess it direct ly infrin ges any of
        the funda menta l rights.

        In case of the enforc ement of Funda menta l
        Rights, the jurisd iction of the Supre me Court
        is o rig inal but not excl usive. It is concu rrent
        with the j ur isd iction of the high co urt under
        Articl e 226. It vests origin a l power s in the high
        court to issue direct ions, orders and wTits of a ll
        kinds for thc e nfo rceme nt ofthe Funda menta l
        Rights. It means when the Funda m e ntal Rights
        of a citb"en are violat ed, the aggrie ved party
        has the option of movin g either the high court
        or t he Supre me Court direct ly.

        Si nce the right guara n teed by Articl e 32 (ie,
        the right to move the Supre me Court whe re
        a funda menta l right is infrin ged) is in itself
        a funda mcnta l right, the availa bili ty of alternate remed y is no bar to rel ief under Articl e
        32. However, th e Su preme Co urt has ruled that
        where relief throu gh high court is ava ilab le
        under Articl e 226, t he aggrie ved party should
        first move the high co urt.

    WRITS-TYPES AND SCOPE
        The Supre me Co urt ( unde r Articl e 32) and the
        hi gh courts (unde r Arti cle 226) can issue the
        writs of habea s corpu s, manda mus, prohib ition , certiorari a nd quo-lvarranto. Furthe r, the
        Parlia ment ( un der Articl e 32) ca n empo wer
        any othe r co urt to issue these wri ts. Sin ce
        no such provis ion has been made so far,
        on ly the Supre me Court a nd the high courts
        ca n iss ue th e wri ts a nd not any other court.
        Before 1950, on ly the High Court s of Calc utta,
        Bomb ay an d Madra s had the power to issue
        the writs. Articl e 226 now e mpow ers all the
        high co urts to issue the writs.
        T hese wTits are borrow ed from Englis h Jaw
        where they a re know n as 'prero gative writs'.
        They are so ca ll ed in Engla nd as they were
        issued in the exerci se of the prerog at ive of
        th e King who was, a nd is sti ll , desc ribed as
        t he 'fount ai n of j ustice '. Later, the hi gh court
        starte d issuin g these writs as extrao rdinar y
        remed ies to upho ld the rights and liberti es
        of the Britis h people .
        T1le wTitju risdic tio n of the Su preme Cou rt
        differ s from that of a high co urt in three
        respec ts:
        
            1. The Supre me Court ca n issue writs only
            for the e n fo rceme nt of funda menta l
            rights where a s a hi gh court c..1n issue
            writs not o nly for the e nforce ment of
            Fu nda m enta l Rights but a lso for any
            other purpo se. T he expre ssion 'fo r any
            other purpo se' refers to the enfo rceme nt
            of an ord inary lega l right. T hus, the wri t
            jurisd iction of the Supre me Cou rt, in
            this respec t, is narro wer than that of a
            high court.
                - The second provisi on 'filS added by the 15th Consti tutional Amendment Act of 1963.
        
            2. The Supre me Court can issue writs agains t
            a person or gover nment throug hout the
            territo ry of I ndi a where as a high court
            Can issue writs aga in st a person res iding
            or again st a gover n m ent or aut hOrity
            located with in its territo ria l jurisd iction
            o nly o r outsid e its territo rial juriscliction
            on ly if the ca use of action arises within
            its territo rial jurisd iction . IS Thus, the territoria l jurisd iction of the Supre me Court
            fo r the pu rpose of issuin g writs is wider
            than that ofa high court.
            
            3. A remed y unde r Articl e 32 is in i tse lf
            a Funda menta l Right a n d hence , t he
            Supre me Court may not refuse to exercise its writ j uri sdicti on. On the other
            hand, a remedy under Article 226 is discretio nary and hence, a high court may
            refuse to exercise its writ jurisdiction.
            Article 32 does not merely confer power
            on the Supreme Court as Article 226
            does on a hi gh court to issue writs for
            the enforcemen t of fundamental rights
            or other rights as part of its general
            jurisdiction. The Supreme Co urt is thus
            co nstituted as a defender and guarantor
            of the fundamental rights.

        Now, we will proceed to understand the
        meaning and scope of different kinds of
        writs mentioned in Articles 32 and 226 of the
        Constitutio n:

        Habeas Corpus
        It is a Latin term which litera ll y mea n s 'to
        have the body of'. It is an order issued by the
        co urt to a person who ha s detained another
        person, to produce the body of the latter
        before it. The court then examines the cause
        and legality of detention. It would set the
        detained person free, if the detention is found
        to be illegal. Thus, this writ is a bulwark of
        indi vidua l liberty against arbitrary detention.
        The writ of habeas corpus can be issued
        against both public authoritie s as well as
        private individuals. The writ, on the other
        hand, is not issued where the (a) detention is
        lawful, (b) the proceeding is for contempt of
        a legislature or a court, (e) detention is by a
        competent court, and (d) detention is outside
        the jurisdict ion of the court.

        Mandamus
        It litera ll y means 'we command'. It is a com-
        mand issued by the court to a public official
        asking him / her to perform his/ her official
        duties that he/she has failed or refused to perform. It can also be issued against any public
        body, a corporation, an inferior court, a tribunal or governm ent for the same purpose.
        The writ of mandamus can not be issued
        (a) against a private individual or body; (b)
        to enforce departmental instruction that does
        not possess statutory force; (c) when the duty
        is discretionary and not mandatory; (d) to
        enforce a co ntra ctual obligation; (e) against
        the president of India or the state governors;
        and (f) aga inst the chief justice of a high
        cou rt acting in judicial capacity.

        Prohibition
        Literally, it means 'to forbid'. It is issued by
        a higher court to a lower co urt or tribunal to
        prevent the latter from exceedi ng its jurisdiction or usurping a jurisdiction that it does not
        possess. Thus, unlike mandamus that directs
        activity, the prohibition directs inactivity.
        The writ of prohibition ca n be issued only
        against judicial and quasi-judicial authorities. It is not avai lable against administrative
        auth ori ties, legislative bodies, and private
        individua ls or bodies.

        Certiorari
        In th e literal sense, it means 'to be certified'
        or 'to be informed'. It is issued by a higher
        court to a lower court or tribunal to quash
        the order passed by the latter in a case. It is
        issued on the grounds of excess of jurisdiction
        or lack of jurisdiction. Thus, like the WTit of
        prohibition, the writ of certiorari is also a
        jurisdicitonal writ. However, they are issued
        at different stages of pro ceedin gs before a
        lower co urt or tribunal. The prohibition is
        issued before the final order is passed for stopping the further continuance of the proceedings, whereas the certiorari is issued after the
        final order is passed for quashing the sa me.
        Like prohibition, certio rari ca n be issued
        only against the judicial and quasi-judicial
        authorities. Similarly, the certiorari is also
        not available against administrative authorities, legislative bodies, and private individuals
        or bodies.

        Quo-Warranto
        In the literal sense, it means 'by what authority or warrant'. It is issued by the court to
        enquire into the legality of claim of a person
        to a public office. Hence, it prevents illega l
        usurpation of public office by a person.

        This writ ca n be issued only in case of
        a substanti ve publi c office of a permanent
        c haracter crea ted by a statute or by the
        Co n sti tution. It ca nnot be issued in cases of
        mini steria l offi ce or private office.
        This writ ca n be so ught by any pub li c
        minded person and not n ecessaril y by t he
        aggrieved person.

    ARMED FORCES AND FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS

        Article 33 em powers the Parliament to restrict
        or abrogate the fu ndam enta l rights of t he
        members of armed forces, para·military
        forces, poli ce for ces, in telligen ce age n c ies
        and a nalogous forces. The objective of this
        provision is to en sure the pro per di scharge
        of their duties and the ma inten a nce of discipli ne a mong them.
        The power to make laws under Arti cl e 33
        is co nfe rred only on Parli ament a nd not on
        state legislatu res. Any such law made by Pa rli ame nt ca nnot be chall e nged in a n y co urt
        on the ground of contrave ntion of a ny of the
        fundam e ntal rights.

        Accordin gly, the Parli a ment has e na cted
        th e Army Act ( 1950) . the Navy Act ( 1950).
        the Air Fo rce Act ( 1950), the Police Forces
        ( Rest r ict ion of Rights) Act, 1966, the Borde r
        Secu rity Force Act a nd so on. These impose
        restrictions o n their freedom of sp eec h,
        ri ght to form associations, righ t to be m emb ers of trade u nion s or polit ica l assoc iation s, ri ght to comm uni ca te with the press,
        right to attend public meet in gs or demon st ration s, etc.
        The expression'members of the armed
        forces' also cove r s suc h e mplo yees of
        the armed forces as barbers, carpenters,
        m echanics, coo ks, chowkidars, bootmakers,
        ta ilors who are non-combata nts.
        A parliamentary law e nacted under Article
        33 can a lso exclude the court marti a l (tribunals established under the mili tary law) from
        the writ jurisdiction of the Supre m e Court
        and the high courts, so far as the enforcement
        of Fundame ntal Rights is concerned.

    MARTIAL LAW AND FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
        Article 34 provides for th e restrictions on
        fu ndam e nta l rights while ma rti a l law is in
        force in any area within the territory of India.
        It empowers the Parliament to inde mnify
        any govern me nt serva nt or a ny other person
        for any act don e by him / h e r in connec tion
        with the maintenance or restoration of o rder
        in any area where ma rtia l law was in force.
        The Parliament can also validate any se ntence passed, punishment inflicted, forfeiture
        ordered or other act done under martia l law
        in such area.

        T he Act of Ind em ni ty mad e by the Parli ame nt ca nnot be challe nged in a ny court on
        the grou nd of contrave ntio n of any of the
        fundamental r ights.
        The co ncept of ma rtial law ha s been borrowed in India from the English co mm on law.
        However, t he express io n ' martial law' has not
        been defin ed a nywhere in the Constitu tion .
        Literally, it means 'military rule'. It re fers to
        a s ituation where civil administration is run
        by the military authorities acco rding to their
        own rules and regul ations framed outside the
        ordina ry law. It t hu s implies the suspen sio n
        of ordinary law and the government by mi litary tribunals. It is different from the military
        law that is applicable to th e armed forces.
        There is a lso no specific or express provisio n in the Co nstitution that authorises the
        executive to decla re marti a l law. Howeve r, it
        is implicit in Article 34 under whi ch ma rtial
        law ca n be declared in any area within the
        territory of Indi a. The martial law is imposed
        under th e extraordin ary circ um stances like
        war, invas ion, in surrectio n, rebellion, riot or
        any viole nt res ista n ce to law. Its just ification
        is to repe l force by force for maintaining o r
        restod ng order in the soc iety.
        During the operation of martia l law, t he
        military a uthori ties are vested with abnormal powers to take a ll necessa ry steps. T h ey
        impose restri ct ion s and regulation s on the
        ri ghts of the c ivili a ns, ca n punish the civilians and even co ndem n them to death .
        
        The Supreme Court held that the declaration of martial law does not ipso facto result
        in the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus.
        The declaration of
        martial law under
        Article 34 is different from the declaration of
        a national emergency under Article 352. The
        differences between the two are summarised
        in Thble 8.7.


------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 8.7

~ 101

Martial Law VS. National Emergency

Martial Law

National Emergency

1. It affects only Fundamental Rights.

1. It affects not only Fundamental Rights but also Centre-

state relations, distribution of revenues and legislative
powers between centre and states and may extend the
tenure of the Parliament.

._ ..

- - ~----~~---.--~;----..--~---.-~---2". It suspends the government and ordinary law courts. .2. It continues the govemment and ordinary law courts.
3. It is imposed to restore the breakdown of law and
order due to any reason.

3. It can be imposed only on three grounds-war, external
aggression or armed rebellion.

4. It Is imposed in some specific area of the country.

4. It IS Imposed either in the whole country or In any part. of it

5. It has no specific provision in the Constitution. It
is implicit.

5. It has specific and detailed provision in the Constitution.
It is explicit.

r

-

---.----.-
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------


    EFFECTING CERTAIN FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
        Article 35 lays down that the power to
        make laws, to give effect to certain specified fundamental rights shall vest only in
        the Parliament and not in the state legislatures. This provision ensures that there is
        uniformity throughout India with regard to
        the nature of those fundamental rights and
        punishment for their infringement. In this
        direction, Article 35 contains the following
        provisions:
        1. The Parliament shall have (and the legislature of a state shall not have) power to
        make laws with respect to the following
        matters:
            (a) Prescribing residence as a condition for
            certain employments or appointments in
            a state or union territory or local authority or other authority (Article 16).

            (b) Empowering courts o.t her than the
            Supreme Court and the high courts to
            issue directions, orders and writs of all
            kinds for the enforcement of fundamen-
            tal rights (Article 32)_

            ( c) Restricting or abrogating the application
            of Fundamental Rights to members
            of armed forces, police forces, etc.
            (Article 33)_
            
            (d) Indemnifying any government servant or
            any other person for any act done during the operation of martial law in any
            area (Article 34)_

        2. Parliament shall have (and the legislature
        of a state shall not have) powers to make
        laws for prescribing punishment for those
        acts that are declared to be offences under
        the fundamental rights. These include the
        following:

            (a) Untouchability (Article 17)_
            (b) Traffic in human beings and forced labour
            (Article 23)_
            Further, the Parliament shall, after the
            commencement of the Constitution, make
            laws for prescribing punishment for the above
            acts, thus making it obligatory on the part of
            the Parliament to enact such laws.
        
        3. Any law in force at the commencement
        of the Constitution with respect to any of
        the mattc'fS spec ifi ed above is to con tinue in
        force until altered or repealed or am e nded by
        the Parliament.

        It should be noted that Article 35 extends the
        competence of the ParLiament to make a law on
        the matters specified above, even though some
        of those ma tters may fall within the sphe re of
        the sta te legislatures (i.e., State List).

    PRESENT POSITION OF RIGHT TO PROPERTY
        Originally, the right to property was one of
        the seven fundamental rights under Part m of
        the Co nstitution. It was dealt by Article 19( 1)
        (I) and Article 31. Article 19(1)(1) guaranteed
        to every citizen the right to acqui re, hold a nd
        dispose of property. Article 31 , on the other
        hand, guaranteed to every person, whether
        citizen or non-citi zen, right against deprivation of hi s/her prope rty. It provided that no
        person shall be de prived of his/he r property
        exce pt by authority of law. It e mpowere d the
        State to acquire or requis ition t he property of
        a perso n on two co ndition s: (3) it should be
        for public purpose, and (b) it should provide
        for payme nt of compensation (amount) to
        the owner.

        Since the commen ce ment of the Constitution , the Fundamenta l Right to Property ha s
        bee n the most co ntrove rs ial. It ha s ca used
        co nfro ntation s between the Supreme Court
        a nd th e Parliame n t. It ha s led to a number of
        Co nst itutiona l amen dm en ts, that is, 1st, 4th,
        7th , 25th, 39th, 40th and 42nd Amendments.
        Through th ese amendments, Articles 31A, 31 B
        and 3I C have been added a nd modified from
        time to time to nullify the effect of Supre me
        Co urt judgements and to p ro tect certain laws
        from bei ng challenged on the grounds of co ntravention of Fundame ntal Rights. Most of th e
        li tigation centred around the obligation of the
        state to pay co mpe nsa tion for acquisition or
        requis ition of private property.
        Therefore, the 44th Amendment Act of 1978
        abolished the right to property as a fundamental Right by repea ling Article 19( 1)(1)
        and Article 31 fro m Part III. In stea d, the Act

        in serted a new Article 300A in Part XII unde r
        the heading 'Right to Property'. It provid es
        that no person shall be deprived of his/ her
        prope rty except by auth ority of law. Thus, th e
        ri ght to prope rty still remains a lega l right
        or a co n stituti ona l right, though no longer a
        fundamental r ight. It is not a part of the basic
        structure of the Co nstitution .
        The right to property as a lega l right (as
        di stin ct from the Fundamental Rights) has
        the fol1owing implications:
            (a) It ca n be regu lated ie, curtailed, abridged
            or modifi e d without co n st itutional
            amend-ment by a n ordin a ry law of
            the Parliam e nt.
       
            (b) It protects p'rivate property against executive action but not agai nst legislative
            actio n.
       
            (c) In case of vio lation, the aggrieved person cannot directly move the Supreme
            Court under Article 32 ( right to co nsti tutional remedies inc luding writs) for
            its enforcement. He/ she ca n move the
            High Court under Article 226.
       
            (d) ' 0 guaranteed right to co mpen sa tion in
            case of acquisition or requ is ition of the
            pri vate property by th e state.

        Though the Fundamenta l Right to Property
        under Part 111 has bee n abolished, the Part III
        st ill ca rries two provi sion s which provide for
        the guaranteed right to co mpe n sation in case
        of acquisition or requi sition of the private
        property by the state. These two cases where
        co mpe nsat io n ha s to be paid are:
        (a) When the Sta te acquires the property
        of a minority educationa l in stitution
        (A rticle 30); and
        (b) Wh e n the State acquires the land held by
        a person under hi s perso nal cultivation
        a nd th e land is within the statutory ce ilin g limits (A rti cle 31 A).
        The first p rov isio n was added by the 44th
        Ame ndm en t Act ( 1978), while the second
        provision was added by th e 17th Amendm ent
        Act ( 1964).
        Further, Articles 31A, 31B and 31C have
        been reta ined as exceptions to the fundamenta l rights.

    EXCEPTIONS TO fUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS

        1. Saving of Laws Providing for Acquisition of Estates, etc.

            Article 31A (Added by the 1st Constitutional Amendment Act
            of 1951 and amended by the 4th, 17th and 44th
            Amendments) saves five categories of laws
            from being challenged and invalidated on the
            ground of contravention of the fundamental
            rights conferred by Artic1e 14 (equality before
            law and equal protection oflaws) and Article
            19 (protection of six rights in respect of
            speech, assembly. movem~nt. etc.). They are
            related to agricultural land reforms, industry
            and commerce and include the following:
            (a) Acquisition of estates (The expression ·'estate' includes any jagir, inam,
muaft or other similar grant, any janmam right in
Thmil Nadu and Kerala and any land held for agricultural purposes) and related rights
            by the State;
            (b) Thking over the management of proper·
            ties by the State;
            (e) Amalgamation of corporations;
            Cd) Extinguishment or modification of rights
            of directors or shareholders of corporations; and
            (e) Extinguishment or modification of mining leases.
            .
            Article 31A does not immunise a state
            law from judicial review unless it has been
            reserved for the president's consideration and
            has received his/her assent.
            This Article also provides for the payment
            of compensation at market value when the
            state acquires the land held by a person under
            his/her personal cultivation and the land is
            within the statutory ceiling limit.

        2. Validation of Certain Acts and Regulations

            Article 31B saves the acts and regulations
            included in the Ninth Sch edule (Article 3IB along with 
            the Ninth Schedule was added by the 1st Constitutional 
            Amendment Act of 1951) from being
            challenged and invalidated on the ground
            of contravention of any of the fundamental
            rights. Thus, the scope of Article 31 B is wider
            than Article 31A. Article 31B immunises any
            law included in the Ninth Schedule from all
            the fundamental rights whether or not the
            law falls under any of the five categories
            specified in Article 31A.
            However, in the Kesavananda Bharati case (Kesavananda Bharati vs. State of Kerala, 1973) 1Sa
            (1973), the Supreme Court rules that the acts
            and regulations that are included in the Ninth
            Schedule are open to challenge on the grounds
            of being violative of the basic structure of the
            condition. This was later clarified by the court
            in the Waman Rno case (Waman Rao vs. Union ofIndia, 1980) wherein it held
            that the various acts and regulations includes
            in the Ninth Schedule after 24 April, 1973 (date
            of judgement in the Kesavananda Bharati case)
            are valid only if they do not damage the basic
            structure of the constitution.
            Again, in the I.R. Coelho case (I.R. Coelho vs. State ,of Tamil Nadu, 2007), the
            Supreme Court reaffirmed the above view. In
            this case, the court ruled that there could not
            be any blanket immunity from judicial review
            of the laws included in the Ninth Schedule. It
            held that judicial review is a 'basic feature' of
            the constitution and it could not be taken away
            putting a law under the Ninth Schedule. It said
            that the laws placed under the Ninth Schedule
            after 24 April, 1973, are open to challenge in
            court if they violated fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21 or the
            basic structure of the constitution.
            Originally (in 1951), the Ninth Schedule
            contained only 13 acts and regulations but at
            present, their number is 282. 20 Of these, the
            acts and regulations of the state legislature
            deal with land reforms and aboliti on of the
            zamindari system and that of the Parliament
            deal with other matters.
                Through the last entry is numbered 284, the actual
                total number is 282. This is because, the three entries
                (87. 92 and 130) .have been deleted and one entry is
                numbered as 257A.

        3. Saving of Laws Giving Effect to Certain Directive Principles
            Article 3IC, in serted by the 25th Amendmen t Act of 1971 , contains the fo Howing two
            provis ion s:
            (a) No law that seeks to implement the
            soc iali stic directive princ iples specified
            in Article 39(b)2! or (C) 22 shall be voi d
            on the ground of contravention of the
            fundamenta l rights conferred by Article
            14 (equality before law a nd equal protection of laws) or Article 19 (protectio n of
            six rights in respect of speech, assembly,
            movement, etc.)
                - Article 39 (b) says- The State sha ll direct its policy
                towards securing that the ownership and co ntrol
                of the material resources of the comm unity are so
                distributed as best to subserve the common good.
                - Article 39 (c) says-The state shall direct its poli cy
                towards securing that tllC operation of the economi c system does not result in the concentration
                of wealth and means of production to the com mon
                detriment.
            
            (b) No law containing a declaration that it is
            for giving effect to such poli cy sha ll be
            questioned in any court on the ground
            that it does not give effect to suc h a pol icy.
            In the Kesavanal1da Bharati (Kesavnanda vs. State of Kerala, 1973),
            the Supreme Cou rt declared the above (b)
            provision as un co nst itutional and inva li d on
            the ground that judicial review is a ba sic feature of the Constitution and hence, ca nnot be
            taken away. However, the above (a) provisio n
            was held to be constitutional and va lid.
            T he 42nd Amendment Act ( 1976) extended
            the scope of the above (a) provision by including within its protection any law to implement any of the directive prinCiples speci fied
            in Part IV of the Constitution and not merel y
            in Article 39 ( b) or (c). However, this extention was declared as un con stitutio nal and
            in val id by th e Supreme Court in the Minerva
            Mills case (Millerva Mills vs. Union of India, 1980).
            Article 31C does not immunise a state
            law from judicia l review unless it has been
            reserved for th e President's consideration and
            has received hi s/ her assent.

    CRITICISM OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
        The Fundamental Rights enshrined in Part III
        of the Cons titution have met with a wide and
        va ried criticism. The arguments of the critics
        are as follows:

        1. Excessive Limitations
            They are subjected to innumerable e xceptions, restrictio n s, qualificat ions a n d expl anation s. Hen ce, the crit ics rem arked that
            the Con st itution grants Fundamental Rights
            with one hand a nd takes them away WiiJl the
            other. Jaspat Roy Kapoor went to the exten t
            of say ing that the chapter dealing WIth the
            fundamenta l rights should be re named as
            ' Limitaions on Fundamental Rights' 0 7 ' Fundamental Rights and Limitations Thereon'.

        2. No Social and Economic Rights
            The list is not comprehensive as it mainly
            cons ists of politi ca l rights. It makes no provision for important socia l and economic
            rights like right to socia l security, r ight to
            work, right to employment, right t lJ rest and
            leisure and so on. These rights are made a~ail­
            ab le to the c itizens of advanced democratic
            count ries. Also, the socialistic constitu tions
            of erstwhile USSR or China provided for such
            rights.

        3. No Clarity
            They are stated in a vague, indefinite and
            ambiguous mann e r. The various phrases and
            words used in the chapter like 'public order',
            ' mi norities', 'reasonab le restri ction'. 'public
            interest' and so on are not clearly defined.
            The language used to describe them is ve ry
            complicated and beyond the comprehension
            of the commo n man. It is alleged that "he
            Const itution was made by the lawyers for (he
            lawyers. Sir Ivor Jennings called the Constitution of India a 'paradise for lawyers '.

        4. No Permanency
            They are not sacrosanct or immutable as the
            Parliament ca n curtail or aboli sh them, as
            for example, the abolition of the funda mental
            right to property in 1978. Hen ce, they can
            becom e a play tool in the hands of poHti·
            dans having majority support in the Parliament. The judicially innovated 'doctrine of
            basic structure' is the only limitation on the
            authority of Parliament to curta il or abolish
            the fundam ental r ight.

        5. Suspension During Emergency
            The suspension of th eir enforcement during
            the operation of National Em erge ncy (except
            Articles 20 and 21 ) is another blot on the effi·
            cacy of these rights. This provision cuts at the
            roots of democratic system in the country by
            placing the rights of the millions of innocent
            people in continuous jeopardy. According to
            the critics, the Fundamental Rights should be
            enjoyable in an situations- Emergency or n o
            Emergen cy.

        6. Expensive Remedy
            The judiciary has been made responsible for
            defending and protecting these rights against
            the interference of the legislatures and executives. However, the judicial process is too expen·
            sive and hinders the common man from getting
            his/ her rights enforced through the courts.
            Hence, the critics say that the rights benefit
            mainl y the rich section of the Indian Society.

        7. Preventive Detention
            The critics assert that the provision for preventive deten tion (Article 22) takes away th e
            spirit and substa nce of the chapter on fun·
            damental rights. It confers arbitrary powers
            on the State and negates individual liberty.
            It justifies the criticism that the Constitution of India deals more with the rights of
            the State against the individual th an with
            the rights of the individual against the State.
            Notably, no democratic country in the world
            has made preventive detention as an integral
            part of th eir Constitutions as has bee n made
            in India .

        8. No Consistent Philosophy
            According to some critics, the chapter on
            funda menta l rights is not the produ ct of an y
            philosophical principle. Sir Ivor Jennings
            exp ressed this view when he said that the
            Fundamental Rights proclaimed by the Indian
            Constitution are based on no consistent philosophy.25 The criti cs say that this creates
            difficulty for the Supreme Court and the high
            courts in interpreting the fundamental rights.
                Sir Ivor Jennings wrote: 'A
                thread of nineteen th
                century libertllism runs through it; there are consequences of the political problems of Britain in it;
                there are relics of the bitter eKPerience in opposition
                to British rule; and there is evidence of a desire to
                refonn some of the social institutions which time and
                circumstances have developed in India . The result is
                a series of complex formulae, in twenty-four articles,
                some of them lengthy, which must become the basis
                of a vast and complicated case law'

    SIGNIFICANCE OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
        In sp ite of the above criticism and shortco mings, the Fundamental Rights are significant
        in th e followi n g respects:
            1. They constitute the bedrock of th e democratic system in the country.
            
            2. They provide necessary conditions for th e
            material a nd moral protection of ma n.
            
            3. They serve as a formidab le bulwark of
            individual liberty.
            
            4. They facilitate the establishment of rule
            of law in the country.
            
            5. They protect th e interests of minorities
            and weaker sections of society.
            
            6. They strengthen the secular fabric of the
            Indian State.
            
            7. Th ey ch eck the absoluteness of the
            authority of the government.
            
            8. They lay down the foundation stone of
            social equa lity and socia l justice.
            
            9. Th ey ensure the dignit y and respec t of
            indivi duals.
            
            10. They fac ilitate the partic ipatio n ofpeo pJe
            in the politi cal and admin istrat ive
            process.

    RIGHTS OUTSIDE PART III
        Bes ides the Funda menta l Rights includ ed
        in Part III , there are certai n other rights

        co nta ined in other parts of the Con stituti on.
        These rights are know n as const itutio na l
        rights or legal rights o r non-f undam ental
        rights. They arc:
            1. No tax shaU be levied or collected except by
            autho rity of law (Artic le 265 in Part XU).

            2 . No pe rson shall be depri ved of his/
            her prope rty save by autho rity of law
            (A rticl e 300-A in Part Xli).
            
            3. Trade, comm erce and interc ourse throug hout the territo ry of India shall be free
            ( Articl e 301 in Part XIII ).
            
            4. The electi ons to the Lok Sabha and the
            State Legi sla tive Assem bly sha11 be on
            the bas is of adult suffra ge (Artic le 326
            in Part XV).

        Even thoug h the above rights are eq ually
        justic iable, they a re d iffere nt from the fundame nta l Rights. In case of violat ion of a
        Funda menta l Right, the aggrie ved pe rson
        ca n direct ly move the Supre me Court for its
        enfor cemen t under Articl e 32, which is in
        itself a funda me ntal right. But, in case of
        violat ion of the above rights , the aggrie ved
        person canno t ava iJ this consti tution al rem edy.
        He/ she ca n move the High Court by a n ordinary suit or under Articl e 226 (writ jurisd iction
        of high court).

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 8.8
Article No



Articles Relate d to Fundamental Rights at a Glance
Subjec t Matter

12.

Deflnltion of state

13.

Laws Inconsistent with or in derogation of the Fu ndamental Rights

14.

EquaUty before law

~~~m

15.
16.

Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment

17.

AbolItIon of ~

18.

Abolitio n of titles

~

RIght to 1If•• dlMJl
19.

Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech. etc.

20.

Protection In respect of _

21.

Protection of life and personal liberty

2 I A.

Right to education

22.

Protection against arrest and detention in certain cases

~--------~------~~
for-. c..

RIght •••II'1II' "".....
23.

Prohibition of traffic In human beings and forced labour

24.

Prohibition of em

ent of children In factorle• • etc.

Fundamental Rights
Article No

~ 107

Subject Matter

_.

~.--.~-..,

27 .

Freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any partlCular ,ellglon

28.

Freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in certain educational institutions.

1---

Cuttural end Educetlonel Rights

29.

Protection of interests of minorities

30.

Right of mln~rliles 10 establish and administer educatlonallnstitUtl..;o_n~
s _ _,_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _.....,
Right to Property (Repealed)

31A.

Saving of laws prOviding for acquisition of estates. etc.

31 B.

Validation of certain Acts and Regulations

31 C.

Saving of laws giving effect to certain directive principles

31 D.

Saving of laws in respect of anti·national actlvlties-{Repealed)

---

Right to Constltutlonel Remedies

----------

32.

Remedies for enforcement of rights conferred by this part

32A.

Constltuttonal validity of State laws nol to be considered In proceedings under Article 32--{Repeated)

33.

Power of Parliament to modify the rights conferred by thiS part In their application to forces, etc.

34.

Restriction on rights conferred by this part while martial law Is In force In any area

,-_35
'""r'

legislation to give effect to the provisions of this part,;,.._ _ _ __

------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------


Chapter 9: Directive Principles of State Policy

    The Directive Principles of State Policy
    are enumerated in Part IV of the Con·
    stitution from Articles 36 to 51, The
    framers of the COl1stitll/'ioll borrowed this idea
    from the Irish ConstihltiOll of 1937, which had
    copied it from tlle Spanish Constitution. Dr. B.R.
    Ambedkar described these principles as 'novel
    features' of the Indi an Co nstitution. The Diree·
    rive Principles along with the Fundamental
    Rights co ntain the philosophy of the Co nstitution and is the sou l of the Con stitution.
    Granville Austin has described t he Directive
    Principles and the Fundamental Rights as the
    'Conscience of the Co nstitution.
        - Actua lly, Directive Principles are mentioned in
        Articles 38 to 5l. Article 36 deals with the definition of state while Article 37 deals with t he nature
        a nd signi fi cance of Directive Principles.
        - Granville Austin, The Indian Constitution-Corner
        stone of a Nation, Oxford, 1966, p. 75.

    FEATURES OF THE DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES
        1. The phrase 'Directive Princi ples of Sta te
        Policy' denotes the ideals that the State
        should keep in mind while fonnulating
        policies and enacting laws. These are
        the constitutiona l instructions or recommendation s to the State in legislative,
        executive and a dministrative matters.
        According to Article 36, the tenn 'State'
        in Part IV has the same meaning as in
        Part III dealing with Fundament.:ll Rights.
        Therefore, it includes the legislative and
        executive organs of the central and state
        governments, all local authorities and all
        other public authorities in the cou ntry.

        2. The Directive Principles resemble t he
        ' Instrument of In struct ion s' e num erated in the Government of India Act of
        1935. In the words of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar,
        'the Directive Principles are like t he
        instrument of instructio ns, which were
        issued to the Governo r-Gen eral and to
        the Governors of the co lonies of Indi a
        by the British Government under the
        Government of India Act of 1935. What
        is called Directive Principles is merely
        another nam e for the instrument of
        instr uctions. The on ly djfference is that
        they are instructions to the legislature
        and the executive'.

        3 . The Direct ive Principles constitute a
        very co mprehen sive economic, social
        a nd pol itica l programme for a modern
        democrati c Sta te. They aim at rea li sing
        the high ideals of justice, liberty, equa li ty
        and fraternity as out l ined in the
        Preamble to the Co nstitution. They
        embody the concept of a 'welfare state'
        and not that of a 'police sta te', which
        existed during the colonial era 3 . In brief,
        they seek to estab lish econom ic and
        socia l democracy in the coun try.
            - A 'Police State' is mainly concerned with the main ..
            tenance of law and order and defence of the coun·
            try against external aggression. Such a restrictive
            concept of state is based on the nineteenth century
            theory of individualism or laissez-faire.

        4. The Directive Principles are non-justiciable
        in nature, that is, they are not legally
        enforceable by the courts for their violation . Therefore, the government (Central,
        state and local) cannot be compelled
        to implement them. Nevertheless, the
        Constitution (Article 37) itself says that
        these principles are fundamental in the
        governance of the country and it shall
        be the duty of the State to apply these
        principles in making laws.

        5. The Directive Principles, though nonjusticiable in nature, help the courts in
        examining and determining the constitutional validity of a law. The Supreme
        Court has ruled many a times that in
        determining the constitutionality of any
        law, if a court finds that the law in question seeks to give effect to a Directive
        Principle, it may consider such law to
        be 'reasonable' in relation to Article 14
        (equality before law) or Article 19 (six
        freedoms) and thus save such law from
        unconstitutional i ty.

    CLASSIFICATION OF THE DIRE<;:TIVE PRINCIPLES
        The Constitution does not contain any classification of Directive Principles. However, on the
        basis of their content and direction, they can
        be classified into three broad categories, viz,
        socialistic, Gandhian and liberal-intellectual.

        Socialistic Principles

            These prin ciples reflect the ideology of
            socialism. They lay down the framework of
            a de mocratic socialist state, aim at providing
            socia l and economic justice, and set the path
            towards welfare state. They direct the state:

            1. To promote the welfare of the people oy securing a social order permeated by justice-social, economic and
            political-and to minimise inequalities
            in income, status, facilities and opportunities 4 (Article 38).
                - The second aspect of this provision was added by
                the 44th Constitutional Amendment Act of 1978.

            2. To secure (a) the right to adequate
            means of livelihood for all citizens;
            (b) the equitable distribution of material resources of the co mmunity for
            the common good; (c) preve ntion of
            concentration of wea1th and means of
            production; (d) equal pay for equal work
            for men and women; (e) preservation
            of the health and strength of workers
            and children against forcible abuse; and
            (f) opportunities for healthy development of children and protection of
            childhood and youth against exploitation and against moral and material
            abandonment5 -(Article 39).
                - The first aspect of point (f) w:as added by the 42nd
                Constitutional Amendment Act of 1976.

            3. 1b promote equal justice and to provide
            free legal aid to the poor' (Article 39A).
                - This Directive was added by the 42nd Constitutional
                Amendment Act of 1976.

            4. 1b secure the right to work, to education
            and to publi c assistance in cases of
            unemployment, old age, sickness and
            disablement (Article 41).
            
            5. 1b make provision for just and humane
            conditions of work and maternity reHef
            (Article 42) .

            6. 1b secure a living wage 7 , a decent standard
            of life and social and cultural opportuni·
            ties for all workers (Article 43).
                Living wage' is different from 'minimum wage',
                which includes the bare needs of life like food, shelter and clothing. In addition to these bare needs, a
                'living wage' includes education, health , insurance,
                etc. A 'fair wage' is a mean between 'living wage'
                and 'min imum wage'.
            
            7. to take steps to secure the participation
            of workers in the manage ment of industries' (Article 43A).
                This Directive was added by the 42nd Constitutional
                Amendment Act of 1976.
            
            8. 1b raise the level of nutrition and the
            standard of living of peopl e and to
            improve publi c health (Article 47).

        Gandhian Principles

            These principles are based on Gandhian
            ideology. They represent the programme of
            reconstruction enunciated by Gandhi during
            the national movement. In order to fulfil the
            dream s of Gandhi, some of his ideas were
            included as Directive Pri nc ipl es. They require
            t he State:
                1. To organise village panchayats and endow
                the m with necessary powers and auth ority to e nable the m to fu nction as units
                of se lf-government (A rticle 40).

                2. To promote cottage industries o n an
                indi vidua l or co-operation basis in rura l
                area s (A rti cle 43).
                
                3 . 1b promote vo luntary forma tion , autonom o u s fun ction ing , de mocratic co ntrol a nd professional manageme n t of
                co-operative societies6~L (Arti cle 438).
                
                4 . 1b promote th e educational a nd econom ic
                interests o f SCs, 5Th, a nd other weaker
                sect io ns of the society and to protect
                them from social injusti ce a nd exploitation (Articl e 46)5. 1b prohibit th e consumption of intoxi cating drinks a nd drugs which are injurious to health (A rticle 47).
                
                5. 1b proh ibit th e sla ughte r of cows, ca lves
                and other milch and dra ught ca ttl e an d
                to improve thei r breeds (Art icl e 48).

        Liberal-Intellectual Principles
            T h e prin c ipl es included in this ca tegory
            represent the ideology of libera lism. They
            direct th e state:
                1. 1b secu re fo r a ll citi zens a uniform civil
                code throughout the country (Article 44).

                2. 1b provide early childhood care a nd educati on for a ll chi ldren until th ey complete
                t he age of six years9 (Article 45).
                
                3 . 1b orga ni se agriculture a nd a n ima l hu sban dry on modern an d scie ntific lines
                (A rticl e 4B).
                
                4. 1b protect and improve the environ ment
                and to sa feguard forests an d ,'llild life 10
                (Arti cl e 4BA).
                Sa.rhis Directive was added by the 97th ConstitutionaJ
                Amendment Act of 201 I.
                ~h is Directi ve was changed by the 86th Constitutiona l Ame ndm ent Act of 2002. OriginaIly, it made
                a provisio n for free and compu lsory education for
                all chil dren until they co mplete the age of 14 years.
                lOoyhis Directive was added by the 42nd Constitutional
                Amendment Act of 1976.
                
                5. 1b protect monum ents, places a nd objects
                of artist ic or historic inte rest whi ch are
                de clared to be of national i mporta n ce
                (Arti cle 49).
                
                6. 'Tb sepa rate the judicia ry from the executi ve in the publi c serv ices of the State
                (Article 50).
                
                7. To promote international pea ce a nd
                security and mai n ta in just and hono urable re latio ns betwee n natio ns; to foster
                respect for international1aw and treaty
                obligations, and to e ncou rage settl e ment
                of intern atio na l disputes by arbitration
                ( Articl e 51).

    NEW DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES
        T he 42nd Amend me nt Act of 1976 added four
        new Direct ive Prin c iples to the ori ginal li st.
        T hey requi re the Sta te:

            1. 1b secure o pportunities for healthy develop me nt of children (Article 39).
            
            2. 1b promote equal justice a nd to provide
            free legal aid to the poor (A rticle 39A).
            
            3. Tb take ste ps to secu re t he participation
            of workers in the management of industries (Article 43A ).
            
            4. 1b protect and improve the environm ent
            and to sa feguard forests and wild life
            (A rtic le 48A ).
        
        T h e 44t h Am e ndm ent Act .of 1978 a dded
        o n e mo r e Dire c tive Principle, w hi c h
        re quires th e State to minimise in equa liti es
        in income, sta tus, facilities and opp ortunities (A rti c le 38).
        T he 86th Ame ndment Act of 2002 changed
        th e subject-ma tte r of Article 45 and ma de
        elementary education a fu nda me ntal right
        under Article 21A. The ame nded directive
        requires the Sta te to provide early chiJdhood
        ca re a nd edu ca tion for a ll children until they
        com plete t he age of six yea rs.
        T he 97t h Amend me nt Act of 2011 added
        a n ew Dire c tive Principle relating to
        co-ope rative societies. It requires the state to
        prom ote vo luntary formation, a utonomon s
        function ing, de mocrati c co ntro l and profess iona l management of co-operative soc ieties
        (Art icle 438).

    SANCTION BEHIND DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES
        Sir B.N. Rau, the Constitutional Advisor to
        the Constituent Assembly, recommended
        that the rights of an individual should be
        divided into two categories-justiciable and
        non-justiciable, which was accepted by the
        Drafting Committee. Consequently, the fundamental Rights, which are justiciable in
        nature, are incorporated in Part III and the
        Directive Principles, which are non-justiciable in nature, are incorporated in Part IV
        of the Constitution. The specific differences
        between the two are summarised in Thble 9:1.
        Though the Directive Principles are nonjusticiable, the Constituti on (Article 37)
        makes it clear that 'these principles are
        fundamental in the governance of the country and it shall be the duty of the state to
        apply these principles in making laws'.

        Thus, they impose a moral obligation on the
        state authorities for their application, but
        the real force behind them is political, that
        is, public opinion. As observed by Alladi
        Krishna Swamy Ayyar, 'no ministry responsible to the people can afford light-heartedly
        to ignore the provisions in Part IV of the
        Constitution'. Similarly, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar
        said in the Constituent Assembly that 'a
        government which rests on popular vote can
        hardly ignore the Directive Principles while
        shaping its policy. If any government ignores
        th em, it will certainly have to answer for that
        before the electorate at the election time,lI.
        The framers of the Constitution made
        the Directive Principles non-justiciable and
        legally non-enforceable because:

            1. The country did not possess sufficient
            financial resources to implement them.

            2. The presence of vast diversity and backwardness in the country would stand in
            the way of their implementation.
            
            3. The newly born independent Indian State
            with its many preoccupations might be
            crushed under the burden unless it was
            free to decide the order, the time, the
            place and the mode of fulfilling them.

        'The Constitution makers, therefore, taking
        a pragmatic view, refrained from giving teeth
        to these principles. They believed more in an
        awakened public opinion rather than in court
        procedures as th e ult imate san ct ion for the
        fulfilme n t of these principles,
            M. P. Jain, Indian COIlstitlitiollal Law, Wadhwa, Third
            Ed ition ( 1978), p . 595.


------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 9.1 Distinction Between Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles
Fundamental Rights

D irective PrmClples

1. These are negative as they prohibit the State from
doing certain things.

1. These are positive as they require the State to do
certain things.

2. These are Justiciable. that Is, they are legally enforceabie by the courts In case of their violation.

2. These are non-Justiciable, that Is. they are not legally
enforceable by the courts for their violation.

3. They aim at establishing political democracy in the
country.

3. They aim at establishing social and economic democracy in the country.

t4. These have legal sanctions.

4. These have moral and political sanctions.

5. They promote the welfare of the Individual. Hence.
they are personal and individualistic.

5. They promote the welfare of the community. Hence.
they are socletarlan and socialistic.

6. They do not require any legislation for their ImplementaUon They are automatically enforced.

6. They require legislation for their Implementation. They
are not automatically enforced.

7. The courts are bound to declare a law violative of any
of the Fundamental Rights as unconstitutional and
invalid .

7. The courts cannot declare a law violative of any of
the Directive Principles as unconstitutional and Invalid.
However, they can uphold the validity of a law on the
ground that It was enacted to give effect to a directive.
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

    CRITICISM OF THE DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES
        The Directive Princ iples of State Policy have
        bee n criticised by some members of the Constitue nt Asse mbl y as well as other co nstitutiona l
        a nd politi cal experts on the following grounds:

            1. No Legal Force
            The Directives have been criti cised mainl y
            because of their non-ju sti c iabl e character.
            While K.T. Shah dubbed them as 'p iou s supernuities' and compared the m with 'a ch equ e
            on a bank, payable on ly when the resources
            of the bank permit, Nasiruddin contended
            that these prin ci ples arc 'no bette r th a n th e
            new year's reso lutions, which are broke n 0 11
            the seco nd of January'. Even as TT. Krishnamac hari described the Directives as 'a veritable
            dustbin of se ntim e nts', K C Wheare called
            them as a 'manifesto of aim s and aspiration s'
            and opined that they serve as mere 'moral
            homil y', and Sir Ivor Jenn ings tho ught they
            are onl y as 'pious aspirations'.

            2. Illogically Arranged
            Cr itics opine that th e Directives are not
            arranged in a log ica l manner based on a co nsistent philoso phy. According to N Srinivasa n,
            'the Directives are ne ither properl y classifi ed
            nor logica ll y arranged. The decla ration mixes
            up relati vely unimportant issues with the most
            vita l economic and social quest ions. It combin es rather in congruously the modern with
            the old and provisions suggested by the reason
            and science with provision s based purely on
            se ntiment and prejudice. Sir Ivor Jennings
            too pointed out that these principles have no
            consistent philosophy.

            3. Conservative
            According to Sir Ivor Jennings, the Di_rectives
            are based on the pol itical philosophy of the 19th
            ce ntury England. He remarked: 'The ghosts of
            Sydney Webb and Beatrice Webb sta lk through
            the pages of the text. Part IV of the Constitution
            expresses Fabian Socialism witho ut the socia lism'. He opined that the Directives 'are deemed
            to be suitable in India in the middle of the
            twentieth century. The question whether they
            a re suitable for the twenty-first ce ntury cannot
            be answered; but it is quite probable that they
            will be entirely out moded.

            4. Constitutional Conflict
            K Santhanam ha s pointed out that th e
            Directives lead to a co nst itutional con flict
            (a) betwee n the Cen tre a nd the sta tes, (b)
            betwee n the Preside nt and the Prim e Ministe r, a nd (c) betwee n th e gove rnor and the
            ch ief mini ste r. According to h im , the Ce ntre
            ca n give direction s to the states with regard
            to the impl e mentation of these prin c ipl es,
            and in case of non-co mplia n ce, can dismiss
            the state gove rnment . Similarl y, when t he
            Prime Mini ste r gets a bill (which vio lates th e
            Directive Principles) passed by the Parl iam e nt, the pres ident may reject the b ill on th e
            ground that these principles are fundamenta l
            to the governance of the co untry and hen ce,
            the mini str y has no right to ignore t hem.
            Th e sa me constitutional conflict may occur
            betwee n the gove rnor and the chi ef minister
            a t the sta te level.

    UTILITY OF DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES
        In spite of the above criticism s and shortcomings, the Directive Princ ipl es are not an
        unnecessary appendage to the Co n stitu tion.
        The Constitution itself decla res that th ey are
        fundamenta l to the governance of the country.
        According to L. M. Si nghvi, a n em ine nt jurist
        and diplomat, 'the Directives are the life giving
        provisions of the Constitution. They constitute
        the stuff of the Constitution and its philosophy
        of social justice (Journal of Constitutional and Parliamentary Studies, June 1975). M.C. Chagla, former Chief
        Justice of India, is of the opinion that, ' if
        all these principles are fully carried out, our
        country would indeed be a heaven on earth.

        India would then be not only democracy in
        the political sense, but also a welfare state
        looking after the welfare of its citizens'(M.C. Chagla, An Ambassadar Speaks, p. 35.). Dr.
        B.R. Ambedkar had pointed out that the Directives have great value because they lay down
        that the goal of Indian polity is 'economic
        democracy.' as distinguished from 'political
        democracy'. Granville Austin opined that the
        Directive Principles are 'aimed at furthering
        the goals of the social revolution or to foster
        this revolution by establishing the conditions
        necessary for its achievement'(Granvilled Austin, The Indian Constitution-Corner-stone of a Nation, Oxford, 1966, pp. 50-52). Sir RN. Rau,
        the constitutional advisor to the Constituent
        Asse mbly, stated that the Directive Principles
        are intended as 'moral preceptsforthe authorities of the state. They have at least an educative value.'
       
        According to M.C. Setalvad, the former
        Attorney General of India, the Directive Principles, although confer no legal rights and
        create no legal remedies, are significant and
        use ful in the following ways:

            1. They are like an 'Instrument of
            Instructions' or general recommendations addressed-to all authorities in the
            Indian Union. They remind them of the
            basic principles of the new social and
            economic order, which the Constitution
            aims at building.

            2. They have served as useful beacon-lights to
            the courts. They have helped the courts
            in exercising their power of judicial
            review, that is, the power to determine
            the constitutional validity of a law.
            
            3. They fonn the dominating background to
            al1 State action, legislative or executive and
            also a guide to the courts in some respects.
            
            4. They amplify the Preamble, which
            solemnly resolves to secure to all citizens
            of India justice, liberty, equality and
            fraternity.

        The Directives also play the following roles:
        
            1. They facilitate stability and continuity in
            domestic and foreign policies in political, economic and social spheres in spite
            of the changes of the party in power.
            
            2. They are supplementary to the fundamental rights of the citizens. They are intended
            to fill in the vacuum in Part III by providing for social and economic rights.
            
            3. Their implementation creates a favourable atmosphere for the full and proper
            enjoyment of the fundamental rights by
            the citizens. Political democracy, without
            economic democracy, has no meaning.
            
            4. They enable the opposition to exercise
            influence and control over the operations of the government. The Opposition
            can blame the ruling party on the
            ground that its activities are opposed to
            the Directives.
            
            5. They serve as a crucial test for the performance of the government. The people
            can examine the policies and programmes of the government in the light
            of these constitutional declarations.
            
            6. They serve as common political manifesto. 'A ruling party, irrespective of its
            political ideology, has to recognise the
            fact that these principles are intended
            to be its guide, philosopher and friend
            in its legislative and executive acts'(P.B. Gajendragadker, The Contitution of India (Its Philoshpy and Postulates), p.11.).

    CONFLICT BETWEEN FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES
        The justiciability of Fundamental Rights and
        non-justiciability of Directive Principles on
        the one hand and the moral obligation of State
        to implement Directive Principles (Article
        37) on the other hand have led to a conflict
        between the two since the commencement of
        th e Co n stitution . In t he Cha mpakam Doraizo
        rajan case (State of Madras vs. Champakam Dorairajan, 1951), the Supreme Court rul ed
        that in case of any co nflict betwee n the Fu ndamenta l Rights and the Directive Prin ci pl es,
        the former would prevail. It declared that the
        Directive Principles have to conform to and
        run as subsid iary to th e Fundamental Rights.
        But, it a lso h e ld that the Fundamental Rights
        cou ld be am ended by the ParJiament by enact·
        ing constitutional amendment acts. As a
        result, the Parliament made the First Ame ndm e nt Act ( 1951), the Fourth Amendment Act
        ( 1955) a nd the Seventeenth Amendment Act
        (1964) to implement some of the Direc tives.

        The above s ituatio n underwent a majo r
        c hange in 1967 following the Supreme Co urt 's
        judgement in the Golaknath case (Golak Nath vs. State of Punjab, 1967). In
        t ha t case, th e Su pre m e Court ruled th at the
        Parliame nt ca nn ot t:1. ke away or abridge any
        of the Fundamen tal Rights, which a re 'sacrosanct' in nature. In othe r words, the Court
        h eld that the Funda m e ntal Rights cann ot
        be a me nded for the implem e n tation of the
        Directive Principles.

        The Parliament rea c ted to the Supreme
        Cou rt's judgement in t h e Golaknath Case
        ( 1967) by e nacting the 24th Ame ndm e nt Act
        (1971) and t he 25th Amen dm e nt Act ( 1971).
        The 24th Amendment Act declared that the
        Parliament has the power to abridge or take
        away a ny of the Fundamenta l Rights by e nacting Constitutio nal Amendment Acts. The 25th
        Amendment Act inserted a n ew Article 31 C
        whi ch con tained the fo llowing two provi sions:
        
            1. No law which seeks to impl e me nt t he
            socia li stic Directive Principles specified in Article 39 (b) and (C) shall
            be voi d on th e ground of co n trave ntion
            of the Fundamental Rights con ferred by
            Article 14 (equality before law and equal
            protect ion of laws), Article 19 (protection of six rights in respect of speech,
            assembly, m ove me nt, etc) or Article 31
            ( ri ght to property).
                - Article 39 (b) says: The State shall direct its policy
                towards securing that the ownership and control
                of the materia l resources of the co mmunity a re so
                distributed as best to subserve the common good.
                - Articie 39 (c) says: The state shall direct its policy
                towards securing that the operation of the economic
                system does not result in the concentration ofwenlth
                and means of production to me common detrimenl

            2. No law conta in ing a declaration for giving effect to suc h policy sha ll be questioned in any court on t he ground that
            it does not give effect to such a policy.

        In th e Kesavanamla Bharati case (Kesavananda Bharati vs. State of Kerala, 1973),
        the Supreme Court decla red the above seco nd
        provision of Article 31C as un con stitutional
        and in va lid on the gro und that judicial review
        is a ba sic feat ure of t he Co n stitution a nd
        hence, can n ot be ta ken away. However, the
        above first provision of Article 31C was held
        to be constitu tion al an d valid.

        Later, the 42nd Amendment Act ( 1976)
        extended the scope of the a bove first p rovisio n
        of Article 3IC by including with in its protection any law to implement a ny of the Directive Princip les a nd not merely those specified
        in Article 39 (b) a nd (c). In other words, the
        42 nd Amendment Act accorded the position of
        lega l p ri macy and sup remacy to the Directive
        Principles over the Fundamental Rights conferred by Articles 14, 19 a nd 31. However, this
        exte nsion was declared as unco nstitutional and
        invalid by the Sup reme Court in the Minerva
        Mills case (Minerva Mills vs. Union of India, 1980). It means that the Directive
        Principles were once agai_n made subordinate to
        the Fundamental Rights. But the Fundamental
        Rights conferred by Article 14 and Article 19
        were accepted as subordinate to the Directive
        Principles specified in Article 39 (b) and (c).
        Further, Article 31 (right to property) was omitted by the 44th Amendment Act ( 1978).
        
        In tbe Minerva Mi lls case ( 1980), t h e
        Supreme Cou_rt also h eld that 'the Indian Co nstitution is founded on the bedrock of the balance between th e Fundamental Rights a nd the
        Directive Prin ciples. They together co nstitute
        the core of co mm itment to socia l revolution.
        They a re like two wh eels of a chariot, one no
        less than the other. '1b give absolu te prima cy to
        one over the other is to distur b the harmo ny
        of the Const itution . This harmo ny and balanc e
        between the two is an essent ial feature of the
        basic struct ure of the Constitution. The goals
        set out by the Directive Princi ples have to be
        achieved witho ut the abrogation of the means
        provid ed by the Funda menta l Rights '.

        Therefore, the presen t positio n is that the
        Funda menta l Rights enjoy supre m acy over
        the Direct ive Princ iples. Yet, this does not
        mean that the Directive Princi ples canno t be
        imple mente d. The Parlia ment can amend the
        Fu nda men tal Rights for imple menti ng the
        Directive Princi ples, so long as the amend m ent
        does not damage or destro y the basic struct ure
        of the Const itution .


    IMPLEMENTATION OF DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES
        Sin ce 1950, the successive gover nment s at the
        Centre and in the states have made seve ral
        laws and formu lated variou s progra mmes fo r
        imple menti ng the Directive Princi ples. These
        are menti oned below:
            1. The Plann ing Co mmission was establi shed
            in 1950 to ta ke up the develo pmen t
            of the count ry in a plann ed mann er.
            The successive Five Year Plans aimed
            at securi ng socio-econo mic justic e a nd
            reduc ing inequ alities of incom e, status
            and oppor tunitie s. In 2015, the Plann ing
            Comm ission was replac ed by a n ew body
            called NITI Aayog (Natio nal Institu tion
            for Trans formi ng India) .

            2. Alm ost all the states have passed la nd
            reform laws to bring ch an ges in the
            agrar ian societ y and to improve the
            condi tion s of the rural m asses. These
            measu res include (a) abolit ion of interm edi ari es like zamin dars, jagird ars,
            inamd ars, etc; (b) tenan cy reform s like
            securi ty of tenure , fair rents, etc; (c)
            impos ition of ceilin gs on land holdin gs;
            (d) distrib ution of surplu s land amon g
            the landl ess labour ers; and (e) coope rative fa rming .

            3. Th e Minim um Wages Act ( 1948), the
            Payme n,t of Wages Act (1936), the Payme nt
            of Bonus Act (1965) , the Contract Labou r
            Regul ation and Aboli tion Act ( 1970),
            th e Child Labou r Prohi bition and
            Reg ulatio n Act (1986 ), the Bond ed
            Labou r System Aboli tion Act (1976), the
            Trade Union s Act ( 1926), the Factories
            Act (1948), the Mines Act (1952) , the
            Indus tri a l Dispu tes Act ( 19 47), the
            Workm en's Comp en sat io n Act (1923 )
            and so on h ave been enacted to protec t
            th e intere sts of the labou r sectio ns.
            In 2006, the govern m ent bann ed the
            child labour. In 2016, the Child Labou r
            Prohib ition and Regulation Act ( 1986)
            was renam ed as the Child and Adole scent
            Labou r Prohi biti o n a nd Regu lation
            Act, 1986,

            4. The Maternity Benef it Act ( 1961) and the
            Equal Remu nerati on Act (1976 ) have
            been m ade to p rotect the intere sts of
            wome n workers.

            5. Variou s measu res have been taken to utilise the financ ia l resou rces for promo ting the comm on good. These incl ude
            nation alisat ion ofHfe insura n ce ( 1956),
            the natio nali sation of fourte en lead ing
            comm ercial banks ( 1969), nation alisation of gener al insura nce ( 1971 ) , abolition of Privy Purses (1971) and so on.
            
            6. The Legal Services Autho rities Act ( 1987)
            has establ ish ed a n ation- wide netwo rk to
            provid e free and comp etent lega l aid to
            the poor and to orga nise 10k adalat for
            promo ting equal justi ce. Lok adala t is a
            statut ory forum for co ncili atory settlement of legal dispu tes. It h as been given
            the status of a civ il court. Its award s are
            en fo rceabl e, bindin g on the partie s and
            final as no appea l li es before an y cou rt
            again st them.

            7. Khadi and Village Indust ries Board, Khadi
            and Villa ge Indus tri es Co mmi ss io n ,
            Small-Scale Indus tries Board, Na tional
            Small Indus tries Corpo ration , Handl oom
            Board, Handi crafts Board , Co ir Board,
            Silk Board and so on h ave been set up
            for the deve lopm e nt of cottag e in dustries in rural areas.

            8. The Comm unity Developm ent Progra m me
            (1952 ), Hill Area Deve lopm ent Program me (1960 ), Droug ht-Pro ne Area
            Progr a mme ( 19 73). Minim um Needs
            Progr am me ( 19 74), Integ ra ted Rural
            Develo pmen t Progra mme ( 1978), Jawah ar
            Rozga r Yoja na ( 1989), Swa majay anti Gram
            Swaro zga r Yojan a ( 1999) , Samp oo rna
            Gram eena Rozgar Yoj ana (2001 ). Nation al
            Rural Emplo yment Guara n tee Progra mm e
            (2006) and so on have been launc hed for
            raisin g the sta ndard of li ving of peo ple.

            9. Th e Wildl ife ( Protec t ion ) Act, 1972 a nd
            the Forest (Co nse rvatio n) Act, 1980, have
            been enacte d to safegu ard the wildli fe
            an d th e fo rests respec t ive ly_ Furthe r,
            th e Wate r a nd Air Acts have provid ed
            for the esta blishm e nt of th e Cent ra l
            and Sta te Pollu tion Co ntrol Board s,
            which are e ngage d in t he protec tio n
            and impro veme nt of e n viro nmen t. The
            Natio nal Forest Poli cy (1988) a im s at the
            protec tion , co nse rvatio n and deve lopment of forests .

            10. Agricu lture has bee n moder nised by providin g impro ved ag ri cultura l input s,
            seeds, fertili se rs and irri gation facilit ies.
            Variou s steps have a lso been taken to
            organ ise a nimal hu sband ry on mode rn
            and scie n tifi c lines.

            11. Three -tier panch ayat i raj syste m (a t vi1lage, ta luka a nd zila levels ) has bee n
            introd u ce d to transl ate into rea lity
            Gan dhiji 's dream of every vi ll age be in g
            a re publi c. The 73 rd Amen dmen t Act
            (1992 ) has bee n enacte d to provid e co nstituti onal status and protec tion to these
            panch ayati raj institu tions.
            
            12. Sea ts are reserv ed for SCs, STh and other
            weake r sectio ns in educa tiona l institu tions, gover nmen t servi ces and re prese nta ti ve bodie s. T he Untou chab ility
            (Offe nces) Act, 1955, which was renam ed
            as the Protec tion of Civil Rights Act in 1976
            a nd the Sched uled Castes a nd Sched uled
            Tribes (Preve ntion of Atrocities) Act, 1989,
            have been enacte d to protec t the SCS an d
            SIS from social injustice and exploi tation .
            T he 65th Co n st itutio n'!l Amen dmen t
            Act of 1990 establ ished the Na ti onal
            Co mmi ssion for Sched ul ed Castes a nd
            Sched uled Tribes to protec t the interests of
            SCs and STs. Later, the 89th Co nsti tution al
            Amen dmen t Act of 2003 bifurca ted thi s
            co mbined comm i ssion into two sepa rate
            bodies, na mely, Nation a l Co mmiss ion for
            Sched u le Castes a nd Nation al Comm ission
            for Sched ule Tribes.
                12a. Vario us nati o n a l-l eve l co mmi ss io n s
                have been establ ished to promo te a nd
                prote ct the socia l, e du cat iona l and
                eco n omi c intere sts of the weake r sections of the soc iety. These in cl ude the
                Nat ion al Co mmis s ion for Backw ard
                Classe s (1993), the Nation al Co mmis sion
                for Mino rities ( 1993) , the Natio nal
                Co mmi ss io n for Wome n ( 1992) and the
                Na tion a l Com missi o n for Protec tion of
                Child Rights (Z007). Further, the JOZnd
                Amen dm e nt Act of 201 8 confe rred a
                co nstitu tion a l sta tu s ou the Na ti o nal
                Comm issio n fo r Backward Cla sses and
                also enlarg ed its functi ons.

                12b. In 2019, t he centra l gove rnm e nt iss ued
                o rders provid ing 10% reserv ation to the
                Econo mi ca ll y Wea ker Sect.io ns ( EWSs)
                in admis sion to edu ca ti ona l institu tio ns and c ivi l posts and se rvi ces in
                the Gove rnmen t of Indi a. The ben efi t
                of this rese rvat io n ca n be availe d by
                the perso n s bel o nging to EWSs who are
                110t cover ed under any of th e ex isting
                schem es of reserv ations for SCs, STh and
                OBCs. This rese rvati o n was fac ilitate d
                by th e 103rd Amen dm e nt Act of 2019.
                
            13. The Crimi n a l Proce dure Code ( 1973) sepa rated the judic iary from the execu tive
            in the public se rvices of the state. Pri or
            to this se para tion, th e distri ct autho ri·
            ties like the coll ector, the sub-d ivisio nal
            office r, the te hsi ldar and so on used
            to exerci se judi cia l power s along with
            the tradit ion a l execu tive powers. After
            the separ at io n, t h e judi c ial powe rs
            were taken away from these executive
            authorities and vested in the hands of
            di stri ct judicial magistrates who work
            under th e direct co ntrol of the state
            high court.

            14. The Ancient an d Historica l Monument
            and Archaeological Sites and Remains
            Act ( 1951) has been enacted to protect
            the monum ents, places a nd objects of
            national importance.

            15. Primary health centres and hospi ta ls
            have been establi shed throughout th e
            country to improve the public health.
            Also, special programmes have been
            launched to eradi cate widespread diseases like malaria , T B, leprosy, AIDS,
            ca n cer, fiJaria, kala-azar, guineaworm,
            yaws, Japan ese en cephalitis and so on.
            
            16. Laws to prohibi t the slaughter of cows,
            ca lves, and bullocks have bee n enacted
            in some states.

            17 . Some states have initiated the old age pension schemes for people above 65 years.
            
            18. India has been fol1owing the policy of
            non-alignment and panchsheel to promote intern atio nal peace a nd security.

            In spite of the above steps by the Central a nd sta te governments, the Directive
            Principles have n ot been impl emented fully
            and effectively due to seve ral reasons like
            in adequate financial resources, unfavourable socio-economi c conditio ns, popul atio n
            explosio n, strai n ed Centre-state relations and
            so on .

    DIRECTIVES OUTSIDE PART IV
        Apart from the Directives included in Part
        IV, th ere are some other Directives contained
        in other Parts of the Constitution. They are:
            1. Claims of SCs and S'Th to Services: The
            claims of the members of the Scheduled
            Castes and the Sch eduled 1Tibes shall be
            taken into consideration, consistently
            with the m ai ntena n ce of efficiency
            of administration, in the making of
            appointments to serv ices and posts in
            co nnection with the affairs ofthe Union
            or a State (Artic1e 335 in Part XVI).

            2. Instruction in mother tongue: It shall be
            the endeavour of every state and eve ry
            loca l authority within the state to provide adequate facilities for instruction
            in th e moth er-to n gue at the prima ry
            stage of education to chi1dren belonging
            to linguistic minority groups (Artic1e
            350-A in Part XV II ).

            3. Development of the Hindi Language: It
            shall be the duty of the Unio n to promote the spread of the Hindi language
            and to develop it so that it may serve as
            a medium of expression for all the elements ofthe composite culture of Indi a
            (Articl e 351 in Part XVII).
        The above Directives are also non-ju sticiable in nature. However, they are also
        given equal importance and attention by the
        judiciary on the ground that all parts of the
        const itution must be read together.
    
------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 9.2

Articles Related to Directive Principles of State Pol icy at a Glance

Article No

Subject MaUer

36.

Definition of State

37.

Application of the principles contained in this part

38.

State to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of the people

39.

Certain principles of policy to be followed by the State

39A.

Equal justice and free legal aid

40.

Organisation of village panchayats

41.

Right to work. to education and to public assistance In certain cases

Article No

Subject Matter

l

42.

Provision for just and humane conditions of work and maternity relief

43.

Living wage, etc., for workers

F

43A.

Participation of workers in management of Industries

438.

Promotion of co-operative sOcieties

44.

Uniform civil code for the citizens

45.

Provision for early childhood care and education to children below the age of six years

46.

Promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other
weaker sections

47.

Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard of living and to improve public health

48.

Organisation of agriculture and animal husbandry

48A.

Protection and impro. . .ement of environment and safeguarding of forests and wildlife

49.

Protection of monuments and places and objects of national importance

50.

Separation of judiciary from executi. . .e

51.

Promotion of international peace and security
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------


Fundamental Duties

    Though the rights and duties of the citi·
    zens are correlative and inseparable,
    the original constitution contained
    only the fundamental rights and not the fundamental duties. In other words, the framers
    of the Constitution did not feel it necessary
    to incorporate the fundamental duties of the
    citizens in the Constitution. However, they
    in corporated the duties of the State in the
    Constitution in the form of Directive Principles of State Polity. Later in 1976, the fundamental duti es of citizens were added in the
    Constitution. In 2002, one more Fundamental
    Duty wa s added.

    The Fundamental Duties in the Indian
    Constitution arc inspired by the Constitution of erstwhile USSR. Notably, none of the
    Constitutions of major democratic countri es
    like USA, Canada, France, Germany, Australia
    and so on specifically contain a,list of duties
    of citizens. Japanese Constitution is, perhaps,
    the only democratic Constitution in world
    which contains a list of duties of citizens.
    The socialist countries, on the contrary, gave
    equal importance to the fundamental rights
    and duties of their citizens. Hence, the Consti tution of erstwhile USSR declared that the
    citizen's exercise of their rights and freedoms
    was inseparable from the perfo rmance of
    their duties and obligations.


    SWARAN SINGH COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS
        In 1976, the Congress Party set up the Sardar
        Swaran Singh Committee to make recommendations about fundamental duties, the need
        and n ecessity of which was fe lt during the
        operation of the internal emergency (19751977). The co mmittee recommended the
        inclusion of a separate chapter on fundamental duti es in the Constitution. It stressed that
        the citizens should become conscious that
        in addition to th e enjoyment of rights, they
        also have certain duties to perform as well.

        The Congress Government at Centre accepted
        these recommendations and enacted the 42nd
        Con sti tutional Amendment Act in 1976. This
        amendment added a new part, namely, Part
        IVA to the Con stitution. This new part consists of only one Article, that is, Article 51A
        which for the first time specified a code of ten
        fundamental duties of the citizens. The ruling
        Congress party decl ared the non-inclusion of
        fundamental duties in the Constitution as a
        historical mistake and claimed that what the
        framers of the Constitution failed to do was
        being done now.

        Though the Swaran Singh Co mmittee
        suggested the incorporation of eight fundamental Duties in the Co nstitution, the
        42nd Con stitutional Amendment Act (1976)
        included ten Fundamental Duties.
        Interestingly, certain recommendation s
        of the Committee were not accepted by the
        Congress Party and h ence, not incorporated
        in the Constitution. These include:

            1. The Parliament may provide for the imposition of such penalty or punishment
            as may be considered appropriate for
            any non-co mpliance with or refusal to
            observe any of the duties.
            
            2. No law imposing such penalty or punishment shall be called in questio n in any
            co urt on the ground of infringemen t of
            any of Fu ndamental Rights or on th e
            grou nd of rep ugnancy to any oth er provision of the Constituti on.
            
            3. Duty to pa y taxes sh ould also b e a
            Fundamenta l Du ty of th e cit izen s.

    LIST OF FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
        According to Article SI A, it sh all be the duty
        of every citi ze n of Ind ia:

            (a) to ab id e by the Co n stituti o n and respect
            its ideals and institutions, the Nat io nal
            Flag and the Na tion a l An them;
            
            (b) to cherish a nd fo llow th e nobl e id eal s
            that inspired the nationa l struggle for
            freedom ;
            
            (c) to uphold and protect th e sovereig nty,
            unity a nd in tegrity of Indi a;
            
            (d) to defen d the country and render nationa l
            serv ice whe n ca ll ed upon to do SO;
            
            (e) to promote harmon y a nd th e spirit of
            co mmon brothe rhood amo ngst all the
            people of India tra nscen ding religious,
            lin gui st ic and regi o nal o r sec tional
            diversi ti es a nd to renounce practices
            derogatory to the dignity of women;
            
            (f) to va lue a nd presen'e the r ich heritage of
            the cou ntry's co mposite culture;

            (g) to protect and improve th e n atural e nvi·
            ro n ment includin g fo rests, lakes, rivers
            and wildli fe and to have co mpa ss ion for
            living crea tures;
            
            (h) to develop scientific temper, humani sm
            and the spir it of inquiry and reform ;
            
            (i) to safeguard public property and to abjure
            vio lence;
            
            (j) to strive towards excellence in a ll spheres
            of indi vidual a nd co ll ec tive acti vity
            so tha t the nati on constantly ri ses to
            higher leve ls of en deavour and achi eve·
            ment; and
            
            (k) to provide opportunities for edu cation
            to hi s/ h er child or ward between th e
            age of six a nd fourteen years. Th is duty
            was added by the 86th Co nst itutional
            Amendment Act, 2002.

    FEATURES OF THE FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
        Following po ints ca n be no ted with regard
        to th e ch a racteristics of th e Fundam e ntal
        Duties:

            1. Some of them are mora l duti es while oth·
            ers a re ci vi c dut ies. for instance, cher·
            ishing noble idea ls of free dom struggle
            is a m ora l precep t and respecting the
            Con stitution, Natio nal Flag and Natio nal
            Anth em is a civic duty.
            
            2. They refe r to such va lues which have
            been a part of th e In dian tradition,
            my thol ogy, religions a nd practices. In
            other wo rds, th ey essentia ll y co ntain
            j ust a codifi catio n of tasks integra l to
            the In dian way of life.
            
            3. Unlike so me of the Fundamental Ri ghts
            whi ch extend to all p ersons whether
            citize ns or foreigners, the Fun dam ental
            Duties are co nfin ed to citi ze ns only and
            do not exte nd to foreign ers.
                - The FUndamental Rights guaranteed by Articles 14,
                20.21, 21A, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 a nd 28 are available
                to a ll persons whether citize ns or fore igners.
            
            4. Like the Directive Principles, the funda·
            men u, l dut ies arc also no n-justicia ble.
            The Co nstituti o n does n ot provide for
            thei r direct enforce ment by the courts.
            Moreove r, th ere is n o legal sa n ct ion
            aga in st their violation . Howeve r, the
            Parliam ent is free to enforce them by
            suitabl e leg islat ion .

    CRITICISM OF FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
        The Fundame ntal Duties mentioned in Part
        IVA of the Co nstitution have bee n cr iticised
        on the foll owi ng gro unds:
            
            1. The list of duti es is n ot ex haust ive as it
            does n ot cover other impo rtant duties
            like casting vote, pay in g taxes, fa mil y
            pla nning a n d so on. In fact, duty to pay
            ta xes was recommended by the Swaran
            Singh Co mmittee.

            2. Some of the duties are vague, ambiguous and diffi cult to be understood by
            the common man. For example, different interpretations can be given to the
            phrases like 'noble ideals', 'composite
            culture', 'scientific temper' and so on.
                - D.D. Chawla, the then president of the National
                Forum of Lawyers and Legal Aid, Delhi, observed:
                'The duties may be spelt out in a more concrete form,
                one is left guessing the noble ideals. 10 some even the
                Bhagat Singh cult may be such an ideal as inspired
                our national struggle. Again what is the rich heritage
                of our composite culture and what is scientific
                temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and
                refonn? The values are beyond the ken of the general
                run of the people and carry no meaning to them.
                Duties should be such and so ,"'>'orded as to catch the
                imagination of the common man.'
                D.O. Chawla, 'The Concept ofF\i.ndamentaJ Duties',
                Socialist India (New Delhi), October 23, 1976, pp. 44-45.

            3. They have been described by the critics
            as a code of moral precepts due to their
            non-justiciable character. Interestingl y,
            the Swaran Singh Co mmittee had suggested for penalty or punishment for the
            non-performance of Fundamental Duties.
            
            4. Their inclusion in the Constitution was
            described by the critics as superfluous.
            This is because the duti es included in
            the Constitution as fundamental would
            be performed by the people even though
            they were not incorporated in the
            Constitution
                - C.K. Oaphtary, fanner Attorney General of India ,
                while opposing the inclusion of fundamental duties
                in the Co nstitution, said that more than 99.9 per cent
                of the citizens were law-abiding and ¢ere was no
                need to tell them about their duties. He argued that
                as long as the people are satisfied and contended,
                they willingly perform their duties. He said, '1b tell
                them what their duties are implies that they are
                not content. If that is the case after 26 years, it is
                not their fault'. A.K. Sen also opposed the inclusion
                of fundamental duties in the Constitution and
                remarked, 'A democratic set-up, instead of thriving
                on the willing cooperation and confidence of people,
                is reduced to the position of a harsh school master
                asking the student to sta nd upon the class room bench
                because he has not done the home work. To begin
                with, it were the people of India who created the
                Sovereign Democratic Republic of India in 1950,
                but the Republic is now claiming to be the master
                of the citizens enjoining habitual obedience to its
                command to do his duty. The state's confidence in
                the citizens is obviously shaken '.
            
            5. The critics sa id that the inclusion of fun damental duties as an appendage to Part
            IV of the Constitution has reduced their
            value and significance. They should have
            been added after Part III so as to keep
            them on par with Fundamental Rights.

    SIGNIFICANCE OF FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
        In spite of criticisms and opposition, the
        fundamental duties are considered significant
        from the following viewpoints:

            1. They serve as a reminder to the citizens
            that while enjoying their rights, they
            should also be conscious of duties they
            owe to their country, their society and
            to their fellow citizens.
            
            2. They serve as a warning against the antinational and antisocial activities like
            burning the national flag, destroying
            public property and so on.
            
            3. They serve as a source of inspiration for
            the citizens and promote a sense of discipline and commitment among them.
            They create a feeling that the citizens
            are not mere spectators but active participants in the realisation of national goals.
            
            4. They help the courts in examining and
            determining the constitutional validity of a law. In Mohan Kumar Singhania
            case (Mohan Kumar Singhania vs. Union of India, 1991), the Supreme Court held that
            Article 51A (fundamental duties) ca n be
            used to interpret ambigious laws in order
            to determine their co nstitutionality.
            Further, in Rnmlila Maidan Incident case (Re, Ramlila Maidan Incident, 2012)
            (2012), the court observed that a common
            thread runs through Parts Ill , IV and IVA
            of the constitution. One Part enum erates
            th e funda me ntal r ights, th e seco nd
            decla res the fu ndame ntal principles of
            govema nce and the third lays down the
            fundamental d uties of the citizen s. While
            in terpretin g a ny of these provisions, it
            sha ll a lways be adv isable to exami ne the
            sco pe and impact of such in te rpretati o n
            o n all the three co nstitutional aspects
            e me rgin g fro m these Parts.

            5 . Th ey a re e n forcea b le by law. He nce, the
            Parliame nt ca n provid e fo r the impos ition of appropriate pen a lty or pun ish me nt for failure to fu lfil a ny of them.

        H.R. Gokhale, th e t h e n Law Mini s te r.
        gave th e foll owi ng reason fo r in co rporating
        the fundam enta l d uti es in the Consti tution
        after twen ty-six yea rs o f its inauguration : ' In
        post- in depe ndent In d ia, particula rl y o n th e
        eve o f e mergen cy in June 1975, a sectio n of
        the peo pl e showed no a nx iety to fu lfil their
        fu n da m e n ta l obligati on s of respecting th e
        esta blished lega l order ..... th e provis io ns of
        cha pter o n fund a me nta l duti es would have a
        sobering effect on these restl ess spirits who
        have had a host of a n ti-nat iona l subve rsive
        and unco nstitu tio na l agitations in the past'.

        Indira Ga ndhi , th e then Prim e Mi n iste r,
        justified th e inclusion of fundam e nta l duties
        in th e Constitu tion and a rgu ed that the ir
        inclusio n wou ld he lp to stre ngth en democracy. Sh e sa id , 'the 1110ra l va lue offundam e ntal du ties wo uld be not to smoothe r rights but
        to esta blish a democrati c balan ce by making
        th e peo pl e co nsc io us of th e ir duties equall y
        as they are co nscious of thei r rights'.

        Th e Opposition in the Parlia me nt strongl y
        opposed the inclusion of fundamental duties
        in the Consti tution by th e Co ngress governme nt. However, the new Janata Governm e nt
        headed by Morarji Desa i in the post-emerge ncy
        period did not ann ul the Fundamenta l Duties.
        Nota bly, the new government sought to undo
        many changes introduced in the Co nstit ution
        by the 42 nd Ame ndm e nt Act (1976) th rough
        th e 43rd Amendment Act ( 1977) a nd the 44th
        Ame ndm e n t Act ( J9 78). Thi s shows that th ere
        was a n eve nt ua l co nsensu s o n the necessity
        a nd des irab ility of includin g the Fundamental
        Duti es in the Co nstitu tio n . Thi s is more clea r
        with the addition of one more Fun dament.:, l
        Duty in 2002 by the 86th Amendme nt Act.

    VERMA COMMITTEE OBSERVATIONS

        The Ver m a Com mi ttee o n Fundamenta l
        Duti es of the Ci ti ze ns ( 1999) identified the
        ex iste n ce of lega l provisions for the impl ementati o n o f so m e of t h e Fundamental
        Duti es. T h ey are me n tio ned below:
            1. Th e Prevention of In sults to Natio na l
            Honour Act ( 1971 ) preve nts di srespect to
            the Co n st itut ion of India , the Na ti ona l
            Flag a nd the National Anthem.

            2. The various c riminal laws in force provid e for punishm e nts fo r encouragi ng
            e nmi ty betwee n differe nt sectio ns of
            peo pl e o n gro unds of la nguage, ra ce,
            p lace of birth, re ligi o n a nd so on.

            3. T he Protection o f Civil Rights Act6 (1955)
            provides for punishme nts fo r offe nces
            related to caste a nd relig io n .
                - This Act was known as the Un touc habili ty
                (Offences) Act" till 1976
            
            4. The India n Pen a l Code (WC) declares the
            imputatio ns a nd <Isse rtion s prejudicia l
            to na tiona l in tegration as punishabl e
            offences.
            
            5. T he Unlawfu l Activ iti es (Prevention) Act
            of 1967 provides for the declaration of a
            communal o rga ni satio n as 8n unlawfu l
            assoc iation.
            
            6. T he Re presentation of People Act ( 195 1)
            provides for the disqualification of me mbers of the Parlia ment or a st.,te legislature
            fo r indulging in corrupt practice, that is,
            soli ci ting votes on the ground of religion
            or promoting e nmity between differe nt
            sectio ns of peopl e on groun ds of caste,
            race, language, religion and so on.
            
            7. Th e Wildl ife (Pro tect io n) Act o f 1972
            prohibits tmde in ra re and e ndangered
            spec ies.
            
            8. The Fo rest (Co nse rvation ) Act of 1980
            ch ecks indisc riminate deforestation a nd
            divers ion of forest land for non-forest
            purposes.


CHAPTER 11: Amendment of the Constitution

    Like any other written Constitution , the
    Constitution of India also provides for
    its ame ndment in order to adjust itself
    to the changing con ditions and needs. However, the procedure lai d down for its amendment is neither as easy a s in Britain nor as
    diffi cult as in USA. In other words, the Indian
    Constjtntion is neither flexible nor ri gid but
    a synthesis of both.
    Article 368 in Part XX of the Con stitution
    deals with the powers of Parliament to amend
    the Con stitution and its procedure. It states
    that the Parliament may, in exercise of its
    constituent power, amend by way of addition,
    variation or rep eal any provision of the Constitution in accordance with the procedure laid
    down for the purpose. However, the Parliament
    cannot a mend those p rovisions which form
    the 'ba sic structure' of the Con stitution. This
    was ruled by the Supreme Court in the Kesavananda Bharati case (Kesavananda Bharati vs. State of Kerala, 1973).

    PROCEDURE FOR AMENDMENT
        The procedure for th e amendment of the
        Constitution as laid down in Article 368 is
        as follows:
            1. An amendment of tbe Constitution can
            be initiated only by the introduction of
            a bill fo r the purpose in e ithe r Hou se
            of Parliament and not in the state
            legislatures.
            
            2. The bill ca n b e introdu ced either by a
            minister or by a private membe r and
            does n ot require prior permissio n of the
            president.
            
            3. The bill must be pa ssed in each House
            by a special majority, that is, a majority
            of the total me mbership of the House
            and a majority of two-thirds of the me mbers of the Hou se prese nt and voting.
            
            4. Each House must pass the bill separately.
            In case of a disagreement be tween the
            two Houses, th ere is no provision for
            holding a joint sitting of the two Hou ses
            for the purpose of delibe ratio n a nd passage of the bill.
            
            5. If the bill seeks to amend the federal provision s of the Con stitution, it must also
            be ratified by the legislatures of half of
            the states by a simpl e majority, that is,
            a majority of the members of th e House
            prese nt and voting.
            
            6. After duly passed by both th e Houses
            of Parliament and ratified by the sta te
            legislatures, where necessary, the bi1l is
            prese nted to the president for assent.
            
            7. The president must give his/her assent to
            the bill. He/she can n either withhold his/
            her assent to the bi11 nor return the bill
            for reconsideration of the Parliament. The
            24th Constitutional Amendment Act of
            1971 made it obligatory for the President
            to give his/ her assent to a con stitutional
            Amendment Bill
            
            8. After the pres ident's assent, the bill
            beco mes an Act (Le., a constitutional
            am endment act) and the Constitution
            sta nds a mended in accordance with the
            terms of the Act.

    TYPES OF AMENDMENTS
        Arti cl e 368 provides for two types of am e ndments, that is, by a special maj ority of Parliament and a lso through the ratifi cation of half
        of the statcs by a simple maj o rity. But, som c
        oth e r articles provide for thc amendm e nt
        of certain provis ion s of the Con stitution by
        a simple majority of Parliament, that is, a
        majority of the members of eac h I-lou se present and voting (similar to the ordinary legislative process) . Notably, these am e ndm e nts
        are not deemed to be illll c ndments of th e
        Constitution fo r the purpos(~ s of Article 368.
        Therefore, the Constitution can be amended
        in three ways:
            (a) Amendment by si mpl e majority of th e
            Parliament,
            (b) Amendmelll by spe c i.1I maj ority of the
            Parliament, a nd
            (c) Amendment
            by spe c ial majority of th e
            Parliament and the riHification of half
            of the state legislatUl:cs.

        By Simple Ma;ority of Parliament
            A number of provi sion s in th e Con stituti o n
            Gill1 be amended by a simple maj ority of the
            two Hou ses of Parliament outs ide the scope of
            Article 368. Th ese provision s include:
                1. Admi ss ion or establ ishment of new states.
                
                2. Fonnatioll of n ew states and aheration of
                area s, boundaries or names of exi st ing
                states.
                
                3. Abolition or c re<1ti on of leg isla ti ve counc il s in state s.
                
                4. Second Schedule-el11oluments, ,i1lowLln ce s, pri vileg es and so on of the
                pres ident, th e governors, the Speakers,
                judges, etc.
                
                5. Quoru m in Pflrliament.
                
                6. Sa laries and allowan ces of the mcmbers
                of Parliament.
                
                7. Rules of procedu re in Parlia me nt.
                
                8. Privil eges of the Parli a me nt, its members
                and it s committees.
                
                9. Use of Eng lish lang uage in Parli a ment.
                
                10_ Number of pui sne judges in the Supreme
                Cou rt.
                
                11 . Conferment of more jurisdiction on th e
                Supre me Court.
                
                12. Use of officiallanguagc.
                
                13 . Citizenship-acquisition and tefll1 iua tion.
                
                14. Elec tion s to Parliament a n d stat e
                legi slatures.
                
                15. Delimitation of co nstituen c ies.
                
                16. Union territori es.
                
                17. Fifth Sc hcdule-admini stration of sch edu led areas and sc hedu lcd tribes.
                
                18. Sixth Schedule-admini stration of tribal
                area s.

        By Special Majority of Parliament
            Th e majority of the provis ion s in the Constitution need to be amended by a specia l
            majority of the Parliament, that is, a majority
            of th e tota l mc mbership of ea ch House and a
            majorit y of two-thirds of the me mb ers of ea ch
            Hou se present and vot ing. The express ion
            'total membership ' mean s th e total numbe r o f
            me mbers comprising the I-lou se irrespecti ve of
            fa ct whether there are va can c ies or absentees.

            'Stri ctl y speak in g, th e spec ial rn ajor ity is
            required on ly for voting a t the third reading
            stage of the bi ll but by way of abundant cauli o n the requirement for spec ial majori ty h as
            been provided for in the ru les of the Hou ses in
            respect of all th e effecti ve stages of the bill.
                - Subhas C. Kashyap, Our Parliament, Na tio na l Book Trus t, 1999, p. 16B.
            
            The provi sion s whi ch can be a mended by
            thi s way includes: ( i) Fundamen tal Rights;
            ( ii ) Direct ive Principles of State Po li cy; a n d
            ( iii ) All other provis ion s whi ch are n ot covered by the first and third ca tegorie s.

        By Special Majority of Parliament and Consent of States
            T hose provi s io ns of th e Co n s t ~tu t i o n which
            are re lated to the federal slru cture o f t he
            polity can be amended by a spec ial maj o rity
            of the Parliament and a lso with lhe conse nt
            of half of the stale legi slatures by a si mple
            majority. Ifone or so me or all rh e re ma in ing
            states take no action on the bill , it does not
            matter; the moment half of the states give
            their consent, the formality is completed.
            There is no time limit within which the states
            should give their consent to the bilL

            The following provisions can be amended
            i n this way:
                1. Election of the President and its manner.
                2. Extent of the executive power of the
                Union and the states.
                3. Supreme Court and high courts.
                4. Distribution of legislative powers between
                the Union and the states.
                S. Goods and Services 13x Council .
                    - This provision was added by the WIst Amendment
                    Act of 20'6. This is related to Article 279-A.
                6. Any of the lists in the Seventh Schedule.
                7. Representation of states in Parliament.
                8. Power of Parliament to amend the
                Constitution and its procedure (Article
                368 itself).

    CRITICISM OF THE AMENDMENT PROCEDURE
        Critics have criticised the amendment procedure
        of the Constitution on the following grounds:
            1. There is no provision for a special body
            like Constitutional Convention (as in
            USA) or Constitutional Assembly for
            .a mending the Constitution. The constituent power is vested in the Par1iament
            a nd only in few cases, in the state
            leg islatures.

            2. The power to initiate an amendment to
            the Constitution lies with the Par1iament.
            Hence, unlike in USA, the state legi slatures cannot initiate any' bill or proposal
            for amending the Constitution except
            in one case, that is, passing a resolution
            requesting the Parliament for the creation
            or abolition of legislative councils in the
            states. Here also, the Par1iament can either
            approve or disapprove such a resolution or
            m a~ not take any action on it.
                - In USA, an amendment can also be proposed by a
                constitutional convention called by the Congress
                (American Legislature) on the petition of twothirds of the state legislatures.
            
            3. Major part of the Constitution ca n be
            amended by the Parliament alone either
            by a special majority or by a si mple
            majority. Only in few cases, the consent
            of the state legislatures is required and
            that too, only half of them, while in
            USA, it is three-fourths of the states.

            4. The Co nstitution does not prescribe
            the time frame within which the state
            legislatures should ratify or reject an
            amendment submitted to them. Also,
            it is silent on the issue whether the
            states ca n withdraw their approval after
            according the sa me.

            5. There is no provision for holding a joint
            sitting of both the Houses of Parliament
            if there is a deadlo ck over the passage
            of a constitutional amendment bill.
            On the other hand, a provi sion for a
            joint sitting is made in the case of an
            ordinary bill.
            
            6. The process of amendment is similar to
            that of a legislative process. Except for
            the special majority, the constitutional
            amendment bills are to be passed by
            the Parliament in the sa m e way as
            ordinary bills .
            
            7. The provisions relating to the amendment
            procedure are too sketchy. Hence, they
            leave a wide scope for taking the matters
            to the judiciary.

        Despite these defects, it cannot be den ied
        that the process has proved to be simp le
        and easy and has succeeded in meet ing the
        changed needs and conditions. The procedure
        is not so flexible as to allow the ruling parties
        to change it according to their whims. No r
        is it so rigid as to be incapable of adopting
        itself to the changing needs. It, as rightl y
        sa id by K.C. Wheare, 'strikes a good balance
        between flexibilit y and rigidity (K.C. Wheare, Modern Constitutions. 1966, p. 43.). In this
        context, Pandit Jawahar1al Nehru said in the
        Co n stituent Assembly, 'W hile we want this
        Constitution to be as solid and permanent
        as we can make it, there is no permanence
        in a Constitution. There shou ld be a certain
        fl exibili ty. If you make a ny Constitution ri gid
        a nd pe rma ne nt, you stop the nati o n's growth ,
        the growth ofa l iving, vita l, organi c peo ple (Constituent Assem bly Debates, Vol. VII , pp. 322- 23.).
        
        Similarl y, Dr. 8.R. Ambedka r ob served
        i n t h e Co n st i tu e n t Asse mb ly t h at , 'T h e
        Assemb ly ha s not on ly refrained from
        putting a seal of fina li ty and in fa ll ib ility upon
        t his Constitution by deny ing the people the
        right to am e nd the Constitution as in Canada or
        by mak ing the amendment of the Constitution
        subject to the fulfilm ent of extraordinary terms
        and cond itions as in America or Au st ralia , but
        has provided for a fac il e procedu re for ame nd·
        ing the Constitution(Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. IX, p. 976.).

        K.C. Wheare has admired th e variety of
        a m e nd me nt procedu res con tained in the
        Con stitution of India . He said, 'th is va riety
        in the a me nd ing process is wise but ra rel y
        found '. Accord ing to Gran vill e Austin, 'the
        am ending process has proved itself one of the
        most ab ly con ce ived aspects of t he Con stitutio n . Alth ough it appears comp li cated, i t is
        me re ly dive rse' (Granville Austin, The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation, Oxford, 1966, p.25.)


CHAPTER 12: Basic Structure of the Constitution

    EMERGENCE OF THE BASIC STRUCTURE
        The question whether Fundamental Rights can
        be amended by the Parliament under Article
        368 came for consideration of the Supreme
        Court within a year of the Constitution coming
        into force. In the Shankari Prasad case (Shankari Prasad vs. Union of India (1951)),
        the constitutional val idity of the First Amendment Act (1951), which' curtailed the right to
        property, was challenged. The Supreme Court
        ruled that th e power of the Parliament to
        amend the Constitution unde r Article 368 also
        includes the power to amend Fundamental
        Rights. The word 'law' in Article 13 includes
        only ordinary laws and not the constitutional
        amendment acts (constituent laws). Therefore,
        the Parliament can abridge or take away any
        of the Fundamental Rights by enacting a constitutional amendment act and such a law will
        not be void under Article 13.

        Again, in the Sajjan Singh case (Sajjan Singh vs. State of Rajasthan ( 1964)), the
        Supreme Court re-affirmed the above stand.
        In other words, the court held that a constitutional amendment act made under Article 368
        is not a law within the meaning of Article 13.

        But in the Golak Nath case (Golak Nath vs. State of Punjab ( 1967)), the
        Supreme Court reversed its earlier stand. In
        this case, the constitutional validity of the
        Seventeenth Amendment Act (1964), which
        inserted certain state acts in the Ninth Schedule, was challenged. The Supreme Court
        ruled that the Fundamental Rights are given
        a 'transcendental and immutable' position
        and hen ce, the Parliament cannot abridge or
        take away any of these rights. A constitutional
        amendment act is also a law within the meaning of Article 13 and hence, would be void for
        violating any of the Fundamental Rights.

        The Parliament reacted to the Supreme
        Court's judgement in the Golak Nath case
        (1967) by enacting the 24th Amendment Act
        (1971). This Act amended Articles 13 and 368.
        It declared that the Parliament has the power
        to abridge or take away any of the Fundamental
        Rights under Article 368 and such an 'act will
        not be a law unde~ the meaning of Article 13.

        However, in the Kesaua nanda Bharati case (Kesavnanda 8harati vs. State of Kerala (1973))
        ,the Supreme Court overruled its judgement in the Golak Nath case (1967). It upheld
        the validity of the 24th Amendment Act (1971)
        and stated that Par1iament is empowered to
        abridge or take away any of the Fundamental
        Rights. At the same time, it laid down a new
        doctrine of the 'basic structure' (or 'basic
        features') of the Constitution. It ruled that
        the constituent power of Parliament under
        Article 368 does not enable it to alter the 'basic
        structure' of the Constitution. This means that
        the Parliament cannot abridge or take away a
        Fundamental Right· that forms a part of the
        'basic structure' of the Constitution.

        The doctrine of basic structure of the constitution was reaffirmed and applied by the
        Supreme Court in the Indira Nehru Gandhi
        case (Indira Nehru Gandhi vs. Raj Narain (1975)). In this case, the Supreme Court
        invalidated a provision of the 39th Amendment
        Act (1975) which kept the election disputes
        in volvi ng the Prime Minister and the Speake r
        of Lok Sabha outside the jurisdiction of a ll
        courts. The court sa id that this provision was
        beyond the am ending power of Pa rliament as it
        affected the basic stru cture of the constitu t ion.

        Again , the Parliament rea cted to thi s judidall y innovated doctrin e of 'bas ic stru cture'
        by enacting the 42nd Amendm ent Act ( 1976).
        Thi s Act a me nded Article 368 a nd declared
        that there is no lim itation on the con st itu e nt
        powe r of ParJiam e nt a nd no amendment can
        be questioned in any court on a ny ground
        including that of the contrave ntio n of any of
        the Fundamenta l Rights.

        However, th e Supreme Co urt in the Minervll
        Mills case (Minerva Mills vs. Union of India ( 1980)) inva lidated this provision as
        it excluded judic ial review whi ch is a 'basic
        feature' of the Co nstitu ti on . Apply ing t he doo.
        trine of 'basic structure' with respect to Articl e
        368, the court he ld that:
            "Si nce the Co nstitution had co nferred a
            limited a m ending powe r o n th e Parli ament, the Parliament ca nnot under the
            exe rc ise of that lim ited powe r en large
            that very power into an absolute power.
            Indeed, a limited amending power is
            on e of the ba sic features of the Constitution a nd, there fo re, the limita tions
            on that power ca nnot be destroyed. In
            ot he r words, Pa rliament ca nnot, un der
            art icl e 368, expand its amend ing power
            so as to a cquire for itse lf the right to
            repeal or abrogate th e Constitution or to
            destroy its ba sic features. The donee of
            a limited power can not by th e exerci se
            oftlult power conve rt the limited power
            into an unlimited one".

        Again, in the Woman Roo case (Waman Rao vs. Union of India ( 1980)), th e
        Supre m e Court adhered to the doctrin e of the
        'basic stru cture ' and furt her clarified that it
        wou ld app ly to co nstitutional a m e ndm e nts
        e na cted after April 24 , 1973 ( i.e., the date of
        the judge me nt in the Kesavananda Bharar;
        case).

    ELEMENTS OF THE BASIC STRUCTURE

        The present position is tha t the Parliame nt
        under Article 368 can amend any part of the
        Consti tution including the Fundam ental Rights
        but without affecting the 'basic structure' of the
        Constitution. However, the Supreme Court is yet
        to define or clarify as to what constitutes the
        'hasic structure ' of the Constitution . from the
        various judgements, the following have e merged
        as (basic features' of the Constitution or e le-.
        me ll ts of the 'basic structure' of the constituti on:
            1. Supremacy of the Constitution

            2. Sovereign, de moc ratic and re publican
            
            nature of the Indian polity
            
            3 . Secular c hara cte r of the Constitution
            
            4 . Separation of powers between the leg isla·
            ture, the execut ive and the judiciary
            
            5. federa l character of the Constitution
            
            6. Unity a nd integrity of the nation
            
            7. Welfare state (socio-economi c justice)
            
            8. Judicial review
            
            9. Freedom and dignity of the indi vidua l
            
            10. Parliamentary system
            
            11 . Rul e of law
            
            12 . Harmony and balan ce between fundamental Rights and Directive Prin ci ples
            
            13 . PrinCiple of equali ty
            
            14 . Free and fai r e lections
            
            15 . Ind e pendence of Judi c iary
            
            16 . Limited power of Parliament to am e nd
            the Constituti o n
            
            17 . Effective access to justice
            
            18 . P rin c iples (or essence) unde rl y ing fundamenta l rights
            
            19. Powe rs of t h e Supre me Court und e r
                - Articles 32, 136, 141 and 1426
                Article 32 (Remedies for enfurcement offu nd.1. mental
                rights including writs), Article 136 (Special 1C<lve to
                .a ppeal by the Supreme Coun), Article 141 (I...awdeclared by Supreme Court to be binding on a ll couns)
                and Article 142 (Enforce ment of decrees and orders of
                Supreme Court and orders as to discovery, etc.).
            
            20. Powers of the High Courts under Articl es
            226 and 2277
                - Article 226 (Power of High Courts to issue cettain
                writs) a nd Article 227 ( Power o f Su pe rintende n ce
                over all courts by the High Court).

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Basic Structure of the Constitution
Table 12.1


Evolution of the Basic Structure of the Constitution

51
No

Name of the Case (Year)

Elements of the BaSIC Structure (As Declared by the
Supreme Court)

1.

Kesavananda Bharati Case l (1973) (popularly
known as the Fundamental Rights Case)

1. Supremacy of the Constitution

~ 2.

Indira Nehru Gandhi Case 3s (1975) (popularly
known as the Election Case)

1. India as a sovereign democratic republic

3.

Minerva Mills Case 4 (1980)

1.

I_

Central Coal Fields Ltd. Cases (1980)

Effective access to justice

S.

Bhim Singhji Case 9 (1980)

Welfare State (Socio-economic justice)

S.P. SfJmpath Kumar Case

7.

lO

2. Separation of powers between the legislature, the
executive and the judiciary
3. Republic and democratic form of government
4. Secular character of the constitution
5. Federal character of the constitution
6. Sovereignty and unity of India
7. Freedom and dignity of the individual
8. Mandate to build a welfare state
9. Parliamentary System

2. Equality of status and opportunity of an Individual
3. Secularism and freedom of conscience and religion
4. Government of laws and not of men (l.e., Rule of law)
5. Judicial review
6. Free and fair elections which is implied in democracy
limited power of Parliament to amend the constitution
2. Judicial review
3. Harmony and balance between fundamental rights and
directive principles

(1986)

1. Rule of law
2. Judicial review

P. Sambamurthy Casell (1986)

1. Rule of law
2. Judicial review

Delhi Judicial Service Association Case

9.

r10.
11.
12.

12

l3

Indra Sawhney Case (1992) (popularly
known as the Mandai Case)
Kumar Padma Prasad Case

l4

lS

(1992)

Kihoto Hollohan Case (1992) (popularly
known as Defection Case)

Raghunath Rao Case

L._ _ _

l6

(1993)

(1991)

Powers of the Supreme Court under Articles 32, 136, 141
and 142
Rule of law
Independence of judiciary

1. Free and fair elections

2. Sovereign, democratic, republican structure

1. Principle of equality
Unity and integrity of India

~_ _ _~_ _ _,"",_"~_~_ _ _ _~
2:-.
.

(Contd.J

6Central Coal Fields Ltd., vs. Jaiswal Coal Co. (1980)
9Bhim Singhji vs. Union of India (1980)
IOS.p. Sampath Kumar vs. Union of India (1986)
lip' Sambamurthy vs. State of A.P. (1986)
12Delhi Judicial Service Association vs. State ofGujarat ( 1991)
13Indra Sawhney vs. Union of India (1992)
14Kumar Padma Prasad vs. Union of India ( 1992)
ISKihoto Hollohan vs. Zachilihu (1992)
16Raghunath Rao vs. Union of India ( 1993)

/

130
SI
No

13.

(! Indian Polity

N ame of the Case (Yea r)

Elemen ts of the BasIc Structu re (As Declare d by the
Suprem e Coufl)

'7
S.R. Bommai Case (1994)

1.

Federalism

2. Secularism
3. Democracy
4. Unity and Integrity of the nation
5. Social Justice
6. Judicia l review

14.

L Chandra Kumar Case18 (1997)

Powers of the High Courts under Articles 226 and 227

15.

Indra Sawhney II Case,g (1999)

Principle of equality

16.

AI/Indi a Judge's Association Case

17.

21
Kuldip Naysr Case (2006)

18.

M. Nagaraj Case

19.

23
I.R. Coelho Case (2007) (popularly known
as IX Schedule Case)

20.

Ram Jethmalan l Case • (20")

21.

Namit Sharma ease

22.

Madras Bsr Association Case26 (2014)

22

10 (2001)

(2006)

2S

Indepe ndent judicial system

1. Democ racy
2. Free and fair elections
PrInciple of equality
1. Rule of law
2. Sepa ration of powers
3. Principles (or essence) underlying fundamental righ ts
4. Judicial review
5. Principle of equality

2

Powers of the Supreme Court under Article 32

(2012)

Freedom and dignity of the individua l

1. Judicial review

2. Powers of the High Courts uncler Articles 226 and 227

I'S. R. BOlllmai vs. Un ion of India ( 1994 )
181. Chand ra Kumar vs. Unioll of Ind ia ( 1997)
19/11 dra Saw/m cy II vs. Un ioll of Imfia ( 1999)
of India (2001)
2()All India fudge's A ssociat ion vs. UI/ion
21 Kllldip Nayar vs. Union of In dia ( 2006)
22M . Nagara j vs. Union of IIldia (2006)
23 1.R. Coelho vs. State ofThm il Nadll (2007)
"U Ram fctlrma lanj vs. UniOIl of India (2 01 1)
25N(IInit Slla mw \IS. Unio n of I/ldia (2 01 2)
:U;Madras Bar Associa tion vs. Union of India (2014)
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------


CHAPTER 13: Parliamentary System

    Th e Con stitution of India provides for
    a parliamentary form of government,
    both at the Centre and in the states.
    Articles 74 and 75 deal with the parlia me ntary system at the Centre and Articles 163 and
    164 in the states.

    Modern democratic governments are classified into parliam entary and preside ntial on
    the basis of the n atu re of relations between
    the executive and the legislative organs of the
    governm ent. The l'arliamenta ry system of
    government is the on e in which the executive
    is responsible to the legislature for its policies
    and acts. The presidential system of government, on the oth er hand, is on e in which the
    executive is not responsible to the legislature
    for its policies and acts, and is constitutionally
    independent of th e legislature with respect of
    its term of office.

    The parliame n tary government is also
    known as cabinet government or respo nsible government o r Westminster model
    of government and is prevale nt in Britain,
    Japan, Canada and India among others. The
    presidential governme nt, on the other hand,
    is also known as non-responsible or nonparliamentary or fixed executive system of
    government and is prevale nt in USA, Brazil,
    Russia a nd Sri Lanka among others.

    Ivor Jennings ca lled the parliam e ntary
    system as 'cabinet system ' because the cabinet
    is the nucleus of power in a parliamentary
    system. The parliamenta ry gove rnm e nt is
    also known as 'responsible government' as the
    cabinet (the real executive) is accountable to
    the Parliament a nd stays in office so long as it
    e njoys the latter'S confiden ce. It is described as
    'Westminster model of governmen t' after the
    location of the British Parlia men t, where the
    parliamentary system originated.

    In the past, the British con stitutional and
    political experts described the Prim e Minister
    as 'prim u.s inter pares' (first a mong equals) in
    relation to the cabinet. In the rece nt period,
    the Prime Minister's power, influence and
    position have increased significa ntl y visa-vis the cabin et. He/sh e has come to play
    a 'doqlina nt' rol e in the British politicoadministrative system . Hence, the later political analysts, like Cross-ma n, Mackintosh and
    others have described th e British system of
    governm ent as 'prime ministerial governm ent'. The same description holds good in
    the Ind ian context too.

    FEATURES OF PARLIAMENTARY GOVERNMENT
        Th e fe atures or principles of parlia mentary
        government in India are as follows:

            1. Nominal and Real Executives Th e
            Preside n t is the nominal executive (de ju.re
            executive o r titular executive) while the
            Prim e Ministe r is th e rea l execut ive (de {ac to
            exec utive). Thu s, th e Pres ident is head of the
            State, whil e th e Pr im e Min iste r is head of the
            gove rnm ent. Art icl e 74 p rov ides fo r a coun cil
            of mini sters hea ded by th e Prime Mini ste r to
            aid and advise th e Preside nt in th e exercise
            of hi s/ her functio ns. The advice so tende red
            is b ind in g o n the Pres id en t'.

            2. Majority Party Rule The poli tical party
            whi ch secures majo rity seats in the Lok Sabha
            fo rms the governm ent. The lea der of that pa rty
            is appo inted as th e Prim e Ministe r by the
            Presi dent; other mi ni sters are a ppoin ted by
            th e Preside n t on the adv ice of the p rime minister. Howeve r, when no single pa rty gets the
            majority, a coa li tion of pa rt ies may be in vited
            by the Pres ide n t to form the gove rnm en t.

            3. Collective Responsibility This is the bedrock principle of parliame n ta ry gove rnm ent.
            The m in is ters a re co ll ect ively res pons ible
            to the Pa rli a men t in ge neral an d to th e Lok
            Sabh a in pa rticu lar (Article 75). They act as a
            team, a nd swim a nd sink toge ther. The principl e of co ll ective res pons ibility im pli es that
            the Lok Sabha ca n remove the m ini stry ( Le.,
            co unc il of mi n isters headed by the Prim e
            Min iste r) from offi ce by passing a vote of no
            co n fidence.

            4. Political Homogeneity Us uall y me mbers
            of th e counci l of ministers belong to the sa me
            poli tica l party, a nd hence they sha re th...e sa me
            political ideology. In case of coa li tio n gove rnment, the mi n iste rs are boun d by co nsens us.

            5. Double Membership The m in isters are
            membe rs of bot h th e legislat ure and the
            execu tive. Thi s mea ns tha t a perso n can not
            be a min iste r without be in g a member of
            the Pa rli ament. The Co nstitut ion st ipu lates
            that a mi n ister who is not a mem ber of the
            Parliament for a per iod of six co nsec utive
            mon ths ceases to be a mi ni ster.
            lThc 42 nd a nd 44th Amend m ent Acts of 1976 and
            1978 respectively have made t he m in isteria l advice
            b ind ing on the p residen l.

            6 . Leadership of the Prime Minister Th e
            Pr im e Mini ste r pl ays the lea dersh ip ro le
            in thi s syste m of gove rn me n t. He/ sh e is
            the leader of cou ncil of mi nis ters, lea der of
            the Pa rli a men t a nd lead er of the pa rty in
            power. In these ca pac ities, he/ she plays a
            sign ifica nt and h igh ly cruc ia l ro le in the
            fun ctioni ng of th e governme n t.

            7. Dissolution of the Lower House Th e lower
            house of the Pa rliamen t (Lok Sa bha) can be
            di sso lved by th e Presi den t on recomm endation of th e Pr ime Mi ni ster. In oth er words,
            the Pri m e Ministe r ca n advise the Pres ide n t
            to d isso lve the Lok Sa bh a before the exp iry
            of its term and hold fresh e lec tion s. Thi s
            means that the execut ive enjoys the r ight to
            get the leg islature d issolved in a parlia mentary system .

            8. Secrecy The ministers operate o n the
            pr inciple of secrecy of procedu re a nd can not
            d ivul ge in fo rm at ion abo ut their p roceedi ngs,
            po licies a nd dec is ion s. They take th e oat h of
            secrecy befo re en te r ing their office. Th e oath
            of secrecy to the mi ni ste rs is ad m in istered by
            th e Pres ide nt.
            ------------------------------------------ Missing page 132 content ------------------------------------------
            ------------------------------------------ Page 133 content start ------------------------------------------

    FEATURES OF PRESIDENTIAL GOVERNMENT
        Unl ike the In dian Co nstitu tion, the America n
        Const itut io n provi des fo r the p residentia l
        for m of gove rnm en t. Th e features of the
        Ame rica n p res ident ia l system of gove rn ment
        a re as fo ll ows:

            (a) Th e American Pres ident is both the head
            of the Sta te a nd the head of gove rnm ent.
            As the hea d of State, he / she occ upies
            a ceremon ia l posit ion . As the head of
            gove rnm en t, he/ she lea ds th e executive
            orga n of govern me nt.

            (b) The Presi dent is elected by a n electora l
            co ll ege fo r a fixed te nure of four yea rs.
            He / she ca nn ot be removed by t h e
            Co ngress excep t by impeach me n t for a
            grave unco nst itut io nal act.

            (c) Th e Pres id en t gove rn s with the help
            of a cab in et or a s ma ll er body ca ll ed
            'Kitchen Cabinet'. It is on ly an advisory body a nd consists of non-elected
            departmenta l secretaries. T h ey a.re
            selected and appointed by him / her, are
            respo nsible only to him / her, and ca n be
            removed by h im / her any time.

            (d) The President and his/ her secretaries
            are not responsible to th e Congress for
            their acts. They neith er possess me mbership in the Congress nor attend its
            sessions.
            
            (e) The President cannot disSolve the House of
            Representatives-the lower house of the
            Congress.
            
            (f) The doctrin e of separation of powers is
            the basis of the American p residential
            syste m. T he legislative, executive and
            judicial powers of th e government are
            separated and vested in the three independent organs of the government.

    MERITS OF THE PARLIAMENTARY SYSTEM
        The parliamentary system of government has
        the following merits:

            1. Harmony Between l.ea:islature and Executive
            The greatest advantage of the parliamentary
            system is that it ensures harmonious relationship and cooperation between the legislative
            and executive organs of the government. The
            executive is a part of the legislature and both
            are interdependent at work. As a resu lt, there
            is less scope for disputes and conflicts between
            the two organs.

            2. Respons ible Government By its very
            nature, the parliamentary system estab lishes
            a responsible government. The ministe rs are
            responsible to the Parliament for all their acts
            of omission and commission . The Parliament
            exercises control over the ministers through
            various devices like question hour, discussions, adjournment motion, no confiden ce
            motion, etc.
            
            3. Prevents Despotism Under this system,
            the executive authority is vested in a group
            of indiv idual s (counCil of ministers) and not
            in a single person. This dispersal of authority
            checks the dictatoria l tendenc ies of the executive. Moreover, the executive is responsible
            to the Parliament ~nd can be removed by a
            no-confiden ce mot ion.
            
            4. Ready Alternative Government In case
            the ruling party loses its majority, the Head
            of the State ca n invite the opposition party
            to form the government. This means an alternative government can be formed without
            fresh elections. Hence, Dr. Jennings says, 'the
            lea der of the opposition is the alterna ti ve
            prime mini ster'.
            
            5. W ide Represent ation In a parliamentary
            system, the executive consists of a group of
            individuals (Le., mini sters who are representatives of the people). Hence, it is possible
            to provide representation to all sections
            and reg ions in the governm ent. Th e Prime
            Minister whi le select ing his/ her ministers
            ca n take thi s factor into cons ideration .

    DEMERITS OF THE PARLIAMENTARY SYSTEM
        In spite of the above merits, the parliamentary
        system suffers from the following demerits:

            1. Unstable Government The parliamentary
            system does not provide a stable government.
            Th ere is no guarantee that a government
            ca n survive its tenure. The ministers depend
            on the mercy of the majority legislators for
            th eir continuity and survival in office. A noco nfidence motion or political defection or
            evi ls of multiparty coa li tion can make the
            government unstable. The Government headed
            by Morarji Desai, Charan Singh, V.P. Singh,
            Chan dra Sekhar, Deva Gowda and I.K. Gujral
            are some such examples.
            
            2. No Continuity of Pol icies Th e pa rliam entary syste m is not conductive for the
            formu lation and implementation oflong-term
            poliCies. This is due to the un certa inty of the
            tenure of the government. A change in the ru ling party is usually followed by cha nges in the
            p olicies of the governm e nt. For example, th e
            Janata Governm e nt headed by Mora rji Desa i
            in 1977 reversed a large numbe r ofpoiicies of
            th e prev ious Co ngress Government. The same
            was repeated by the Congress government after
            it ca m e bac k to power in 1980.
            
            3. Dictato rship of the Cabinet When t he
            ruling party e njoys absolute majority in the
            Parliame n t, the cabin et becomes a utoc rati c
            and exercises nearl y unlimited powers.
            H.J . La ski says that th e parliamenta ry system gives the executive an oppo rtunity for
            ty rann y. Ram say Muir, the for m er British
            Prime Mini ste r, also co mplained of the 'di ctatorship of the ca binet (How Britain is Governcd is il popular book written
    by him.), This phenomenon
            was witnessed during the era of Indira Gandhi
            an d Rajiv Gand hi.

            4 . Again st Separation of Powers In t he parli amentary syste m, the legislature a nd the
            exec ut ive a re toget her a nd inseparable. The
            ca bin et acts as the leader of legislature as we ll
            as the executi ve. As Bagehot points out, ' the
            cab in et is a hyp hen that joins the bu ckle t hat
            binds the executi ve and leg islative departments together.' He n ce, th e whole syste m of
            government goes aga in st the letter and spirit
            of the th eory of se paration of powers . I n fa ct,
            there is a fus ion of powers.
                - This theory was propounded by Montesquieu, a
                French political thinker, in his book The Spirit of
                Laws ( 1748) to promote indi vidual liberty. He stated
                that concentration of powers in one person or
                a body of perso ns would result in despotis m a nd
                negate individua l liberty.
                
            5. Government by Amateurs The parlia me n-
            ta ry syste m is not conducive to admin istrative
            efficiency as the ministers are not experts
            in their field s. The Prime Ministe r ha s a
            limited choi ce in the selection of ministe rs;
            hi s/ h e r choi ce is restri cted to the members
            of Parliame n t a lo n e a nd docs not extend
            to exte rn a l talent. Moreover, the mini sters
            devote most of their time to parliamentary
            work, cab in et meetings and party activities.
            The co mpari so n of the parlia mentary a nd
            president ial systems in terms of the ir features,
            merits a nd de me rits is given in Thble 13.1.

    REASONS FOR ADOPTING PARLIAMENTARY SYSTEM
        A plea was made in favour of the US pres ide n-
        tial sys te m of gove rn ment in t he Constitue n t
        Asse mb lly (K . T. Shah favoured th e adoption of the presiden-
tial system). But, th e fo undin g fathers preferred the British parliamentary system due
        to the follow ing reasons:

            1. Familiarity with the System T h e
            Co nstitution-makers were so mewhat familiar
            with th e pa rli a me nt.uy system as it had been
            in o pera tion in India during th e Briti sh ru le.
            K.M. Mun shi argued that , 'For the last thirty
            o r forty yea rs, some kind of resp ons ibi lity
            ha s been introdu ced in the governance of
            th is cou ntry. Our co n stitutional trad itions
            have beco me Parliamentary. After this exper i ~
            e n ce, why should we go bac k a nd buy a novel
            ex pe ri e nce.'

            2. Preference to More Responsibility Dr. B.R.
            Ambedkar pointed out in the Constituent
            Asse mb ly that 'a democratic executi ve mu st
            sa ti sfy two co nd ition s: stability and respon sibi li ty. Unfortunate ly, it ha s not been poss ible
            so f~lr to dev ise a syste m which ca n ensure
            both in equal degree. The America n system
            gives more sta bility but less respon sibility.
            The British system, o n the other hand, gives
            more respo n sibi l ity but less stabi li ty. Th e
            Draft Co nstitution in recom mending the pa rliam e n tary syste m of Executive ha s prefe rred'
            more responsibi li ty to mo re stabi li ty.'6

            3. Need to Avoid Legislative-Executive
            Confl icts T he fram ers of the Co n st itution
            wanted to avoid the co nflicts between the legislatu re and the executive which are bound to
            occur in the preside n tia l syste m preva len t in
            USA. Th ey thought t ha t an infa nt democra cy
            could not afford to take the risk of a perpetual
            cleavage, feud or conflict or threatened co nflict between these two organs of the government. They wanted a form of government
            that would be conductive to th e ma nifold
            development of the country.

            4. N ature of Indian Soc iety India is one
            of the most heterogeneous States and most
            complex plural societies in the world. Hence,
            the Constitution-makers adopted the parliamentary system as it offers greater scope
            for giving representation to various section ,
            interests and regions in the govern ment. This
            promotes a national spirit among the people
            and builds a united India.

            Whether the parliamentary system should
            be continued or should be replaced by the
            presidential system has been a point of discussion and debate in our country since the
            ) 9iOs . This matter was considered in detail
            by the $waran Singh Committee appointed by
            the Co ngress government in 1975. The co mmittee opined that the parliamentary system
            has been doing well and hence, there is no
            need to rep lace it by the preside ntial system.

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 13.1

-

~ 135

Comparing Parliamenta ry and Presidential Systems

Parliamentary System

PreSidential System

. Features:
1. Dual executive.
2. Majority party rule
3. Collective responsibility.
4. Political homogeneity
5. Double membership.
6. leadership of prime minister.
7. Dissolution of lower House.
8. Fusion of powers.

Features :
1. Single executive.
2. President and legislators elected separately for a fixed term.
3. Non-responsibility
4. Political homogeneity may not exist.
5. Single membership
6. Domination of president.
7. No dissolution of Lower House.
S. Separation of powers.

Merits:
1. Harmony between legislature and executive.
2. ResponSible government.
3. Prevents despotism. 4. Wide representation.

DemerJts:

Demerits:
, . Unstable government.
2. No continuity of policies.
3. Against separation of powers
4. Government by amateurs.

Merits:
1. Stable government.
2. Definiteness in policies.
3. Based on separation o f powers.
4. Government by experts

,. Conflict between legislature and executive.
2. Non-responsible government.
3. May lead to autocracy.
4. Narrow representation.
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------


    DISTINCTION BETWEEN INDIAN AND BRITISH MODELS
        The parliamentary syste m of government in
        India is largely based on the British parliamentary system. However, it never beca m e a
        replica of the British system and differs in
        the following respects:
            1. India has a republican system in place of
            the British monarchical system. In other
            words, the Head of the State in India
            (that is, President) is elected, while
            the Head of the State in Bri tain (that
            is, King or Queen) enjoys a hered itary
            position .

            2. The British system is based on the doctrine of the sovereignty of Parliament,
            while the Parliament is not supreme in
            India and enjoys limited and restricted
            powers due to a written Constitution,
            federal system, judicial review a nd fun·
            damental rights.

            3. In Britain, the Prime Minister should be
            a m e mber of the Lower Hou se (House
            of Commons) of the Parliament. In
            India, the Prim e Minister m ay be a
            member of any of the two Houses of
            Parliament. 
                - For examp le, three Prime l\'iinisters, Indira Gandh i
                (1966), Oeve Gowda (1996), and Manmohan Singh
                (2004), were members of the Rajya Sabha.

            4. Usually, the members of Parliament alone
            are appointed as ministers in Britain.
            In India, a person who is not a member
            of Parliament can also be appointed
            as minister, but for a maximum period
            of six months.

            5. Britain has a system of lega l responsibility of the minister while lndia has
            no such system. Unlike in Britain, the
            ministers in India are not required to
            countersign the official acts of the Head
            of the State.
            
            6. 'Shadow cabinet' is a unique institution
            of the British cabinet system. It is formed
            by the opposition party to balance the
            ru ling cabinet and to prepare its members for future ministerial office. There
            is no such institution in India.


CHAPTER 14: FEDERAL SYSTEM
    Political scientists have classified gov-
    ernments into unitary and federal on
    the basis of the nature of relations
    between the national government and the re-
    gional governments. By definition, a unitary
    government is one in which an the powers
    are vested in the national government and the
    regional governments, if at al1 exist, derive
    their authority from the national govern-
    ment. A federal government, on the other
    hand, is one in which powers are divided
    between the national government and the re-
    gional governments by the Constitution itself
    and both operate in their respective jurisdic-
    tions independently. Britain, France, Japan,
    China, Italy, Norway, Sweden and so on have
    a unitary model of government while the
    US, Switzerland, Australia, Canada, Russia,
    Brazil, Argentina and so on have a federal
    J1?odel of government, In a federal model, the
    national government is known as the Federal
    government or the Central government or the
    Union government and the regional govern·
    ment is known as the state government or the
    provincial government.

    The specific featu'res of the federal and
    unitary governments are mentioned in a
    comparative manner in Table 14.1.
    The term 'federation' is drived from ' a
    Latin word foedu s which means 'treaty' or
    'agreement'. Thus, a federation is a new state
    (political system) which is formed through a
    treaty or an agreement between the various
    units. The units of a federation are known
    by various names like states (as in US) or
    cantons (as in Switzerland) or provinces (as
    in Canada) or republics (as in Russia).
    A federation can be formed in two ways,
    that is, by way of integration or by way of
    disintegration. In the first case, a number of
    militarily weak or econom ica lly backward
    states (independent) come together to form
    a big and a strong u n ion, as for example,
    the US. In the seco nd casc, a big unitary
    state is converted into a federation by grant-
    ing autonomy to the provinces to promote
    regional interest (fo r example, Ca nada). The
    US is the first and the oldest federatio n in
    the world. It was formed in 1787 following the
    America n Revolution (1775-83). It comprises
    50 states (orig inally 1 3 states) a nd is taken as
    the model of fede ratio n. The Ca nadian Fed-
    eration, comprising 10 provinces (originally 4
    provinces) is a lso qu ite old-formed in 1867.
    The Const itution of India provides fo r a
    federal system of govern ment in the coun-
    try. The framers adopted the federa l system
    due to two main reasons-the large size of
    the country and its socio-cultura l diversity.
    They realised tha t the federa l system not
    only ensures the efficient governa nce of the
    cou n try but also reconciles nat ional unity
    with regional autonomy . .

    However, the term 'federation' has no
    where been used in the Constitution. Instead,
    Article 1 of the Co nstitution describes India
    asCi 'Unio n of States'. According to Dr. B.R.
    Ambedkar, the phrase 'U nio n of States' has
    been preferred to 'Fede ra tion of Sta tes' to
    indicate two th ings: (i) the Indian federation
    is not the result of an agree ment a mong the
    states like the American federation ; and (ii)
    the states have no right to secede from the
    federation . The federa tion is a un ion because
    it is indestructible.-

    The Indian fede ral system is based on the
    'Ca nadian model' and not o n the 'A merican
    model'. The 'Canadian model' differs funda-
    menta lly from the 'American model ' in so
    fa r as it establishes a very strong centre. The
    Ind ian federation resembles the Ca ndian
    federation (i) in its formation ( i.e. , by way of
    disintegration); (ii) in its p reference to the
    term 'Union' (the Canadhl11 federation is also
    called a 'Union'); and (iii) in its central ising
    tende ncy (i.e. , vesting more powers in the
    centre vis-a-v is the states).

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 14. 1 Comparing Features of Federal and Unitary Governments
Federal Government UnItary Government
1. Dual Government (that is, national government
1. Single government, that Is. the national government which
and reglon~1 government)
may create regional governments
[ 2. Wrinen Constitution
2. Constitution ~ay be ~ritten (F;anCe) o.!: unwri~en (Britain) . J
3. Division of powers between the national and
3. No division of powers. All powers are vested in the national
regional government
government
[ 4. Sup<em,cy ofth. constit~u~~
4. Constitution may be supreme (Japan) or may not be
supreme (Britain)
5. Rigid Constitution
1 6. I ~depende n t Judicl~ry
S. Constitution may be rigid (France) or flexible (Britain)
6. l udlclary ~ay be _ lndepende~t or may .not ~e Ind~penden t ~ 1
. 7"-
~icameral I :~i ~e
7. Legislature may be bicameral (Britain) or unicameral (China)
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

    FEDERAL FEATURES OF THE CONSTITUTION
        The federal features of the Constitution of
        India are expla ined below:
            1. Dual Polity
            T he Constitution establishes a dual polity
            co nsisti ng of the Union at the Centre a nd the
            states at the periphe ry. Each is endowed with
            sovereign powers to be exercised in the field
            assigned to thcm respectively by the Consti-
            tution . The Union govern ment deals with
            matters of nat ional importan ce like defence,
            fore ign affa irs, currency, communication and
            so on. The state governments, on the othe r
            hand, look after matters of regional and local
            im portance like public order, agricul ture,
            hea lth, local government and so on.

            2. Written Constitution
            T he Co nst itution is not only a written docu-
            ment but a lso the lengthiest Constitution
            of the world. Origina lly, it contained a Pre-
            amb le, 395 Artic les (d ivided into 22 Parts)
            an d 8 Sc hed ul es. At present, it consists
            of a Preamble, about 470 Articles (divided
            in to 25 Parts) a nd 12 Sched ules. It speci-
            fi es t he structure, organisatio n , powers and
            funct ions of both the Ce ntra l a nd state gov-
            ernm e nts and prescribes the limits withi n
            which th ey must operate. Thus, it avo ids
            the misunde rstandings and disagree ments
            between the two.
                - The American Constitution originally co nsisted
                of 7 Articles on ly, thc Australian 128 and the
                Canadia n 147.
                - Thc various amendmcnts ca rried o ut since 1 951
                hiwe deleted about 20 Articles a nd one Part (Vl!)
                and added abollt 95 Articles, four Parts (IVA, IXA,
                IXB a nd Xl VA) and four Schcdules (9,10, II and 12).

            3. Division of Powers
            The Constitution d ivided the powers between
            the Centre and the states in terms of the
            Union List, Statc List and Concurrent List in
            the Seventh Schedule. The Union List consists
            of 98 subjects (originally 97), the State List
            59 subjects (origin" ally 66) and the Concur-
            rent List 52 subjects (originally 47). Both the
            Centre and the states can make laws on the
            subjects of the concurrent Jist, but in case of a
            conflict, the Central law prevails. The residu-
            ary subjects (ie, which are not mentioned in
            any of the three lists) are given to the Centre.

            4. Supremacy of the Constitution
            The Constitution is the supreme (or the high-
            est) law ofthe land . .The laws enacted by the
            Centre and the states must conform to its
            provisions. Otherwise, they can be declared
            invalid by the Supreme Court or the high
            courts through their power of judicial review.
            Thus, the organs of the government (legis-
            lative, executive and judicial) at both the
            levels must operate within the jurisdiction
            prescribed by the Constitution.

            5. Rigid Constitution
            The division of powers established by the
            Constitution as well as the supremacy of
            the Constitution can be maintained only if
            . the method of its amendment is rigid.
            Hence, the Constitution is rigi4 to the extent
            that those provisions which are concerned
            with the federal structure (Le., Centre-state
            relations and judicial organisation) can be
            amended only by the jOint action of the
            Central and state governments. Such provi-
            sions require for their amendment a special
            majority4 of the Parliament and also an
            approval of half of the state legislatures.
                - A majority of two-thirds of the members of each
                House present and 'voting and a majority of the
                total membership of each House.

            6. Independent Judiciary
            The Constitution establishes an independent
            judiciary ~ea· ded by the Supreme Court for
            two purposes: one, to protect the supremacy
            of the Constitution by exercising the power of
            judicial review; and two, to settle the disputes
            between the Centre and the states or between
            the states. The Constitution contains various
            measures like security of tenure" to judges,
            fixed service conditions and so on to make
            the judiciary independent of the government.

            7. Bicameralism
            The Constitution provides for a bicameral
            legislature consisting of an Upper House
            (Rajya Sabha) and a Lower House (Lok
            Sabha).·The Rajya Sabha represents the states
            of Indian Federation, while the Lok Sabha
            represents the people of India as a whole.
            The Rajya Sabha (even though a less power-
            ful chamber) is required to maintain the fed-
            eral equilibrium by protecting the interests
            of the states against the undue interference
            of the Centre.

    UNITARY FEATURES OF THE CONSTITUTION
        Besides the above federal features, the Indian
        Constitution also possesses the following uni-
        tary or non-federal features:
            1. Strong Centre
            The division of powers is in favour of the Cen-
            tre and highly inequitable from the federal
            angle. Firstly, the- Union List contains more
            subjects than the State List. Secondly, the
            more important subjects have been included
            in the Union List. Thirdly, the Centre has
            overriding auth. ority over the Concurrent List.
            Finally, the residuary powers have also been
            lef:t with the Centre, while in the US, they are
            vested in the states. Thus, the Constitution has
            made the Centre very strong.

            2. States Not Indestructible
            Unlike in other federations, the states in India
            have no right to territorial integrity. The
            Parliament can by unilateral action change
            the area, boundaries or name of any state.
            Moreover, it requires only a simple major-
            ity and not a special majority. Hence, the
            ndia n Federation is "a n indestructible Union
            of destructible states~. The America n Federa-
            tion, on the other hand, is described as ~an
            indestructible Union of indestructible states".
            
            3. Single Constitution
            Us ually, in a federation , the states have the
            right to fra me their own Constitutio n sepa-
            rate from that of the Centre. In India, on the
            contra ry, no such power is given to the states.
            The Constitution of India embodies not onl y
            the Constitution of the Centre but also those
            of the states. Both the Ccntre and the states
            must ope rate within th is single-fra me. The
            only exception in th is rega rd was the case of
            erstwh ile Ja mm u and K ash mir which had its
            own (state) ConstitutIO n.
                - Till 2O19, the erstwhile state of Jammu a nd Kashmir
                enjoyed a special status by virtue of Article 370 of
                the Constitution of India

            4. Flexibility ofthe Constitution
            The process of constitutional a mendment is
            less rigid tha n what is found in other fed-
            erations. The bulk of the Constitution ca n be
            amended by the un ilatera l action of the Parlia-
            ment, either by simple majority or by special
            majority. Further, the power to initiate a n
            a me ndment to the Constitution lies only with
            the Centre. In US, the states can also propose
            .::In ame ndment to the Constitut ion.

            5. No Equality of State Representation
            The states are given representation in the R ajya
            Sabha on the basis of population. Hence, the
            membership varies fro m I to 31. In US, 011 the
            other ha nel, the principle of equality of repre-
            sentHtion of states in the Upper '
            -louse is fu lly
            recogn ised. TllUS, the American Senate has
            ]00 membcrs, two from each state. This princi-
            ple is regarded as a safeguard for smaller states.

            6. Emergency Provisions
            The Const itution stipula tes three types of
            emergencies-national, state a nd financial.
            During an emergency, the Central government
            becomes all powerfu l and the states go into
            the total control ofthe Centre. It converts the
            federa l structu re into a unitary one without a
            formal amendme nt of the Consti tution. Th is
            kind of tra nsformation is not found in any
            other federation.

            7. Single Citizenship
            In spite of a dual polity, the Constitution of
            Indja, like that of Ca nada, adopted the system
            of single citizenship. There is only Indian Citi-
            zenship and no separate state citizensh ip. All
            citizens irrespective of the state in which they
            are born or reside enjoy the same rights all
            over the cou ntry. The other federal sta tes like
            US and Australia have dual citizenship, that is,
            national citizenship as well as state citi'l..enship.

            8. Integrated Judiciary
            The Indian Constitution has established an
            integrated j udicial system with the Su preme
            Court at the top a nd the state h igh courts
            below it. This single system of courts enforces
            both the Central laws as well as the state laws.
            In US, on the other hand, there is a double
            system of courts whereby the federal laws are
            en forced by the federa l j udiciary and the state '
            laws by the state judicia ry.

            9. All-India Services
            In US, the Federal government and the state
            governments have their separate public ser-
            vices. In India a lso, the Centre a nd the stHtes
            have their separate public services. But, in
            addition, there a re all-India se rvices (lAS,
            IPS, a nd IFoS) wh ich are common to both the
            Centre and the states. The members of these
            services are recruited a nd trained by the Cen-
            tre wh ich also possess ultima te control over
            them. Thus, these services violate the principle
            of federalism under the Constitution .

            10. Integrated Audit Machinety
            The Comptrolle r and Auditor-General of India
            audits the accounts of not only the Centra l
            government but also those of the sta tes. But,
            his/her appointment and removal is done
            by the President without consulting the
            states. Hence, this office restricts the finan-
            cial autonomy of the states. The American
            Comptroller-General, on the contrary, has no
            role with respect to the accounts of the states.

            11. Parliament's Authority Over State List
            Even in the limited sphere of authority allot-
            ted to them, the states do not have exclusive
            control. The Parliament is empowered to
            legislate on any subject of the State List if the
            Rajya Sabha passes a resolution to that effect
            in the national interest. This means that the
            legislative competence of the Parliament can
            be extended without amending the Constitu-
            tion. Notably, this can be done when there is
            no emergency of any kind.

            12. Appointment of Governor
            The governor, who is the head of the state, is
            appointed by the President. He/she holds office
            during the pleasure of the President. He/she also
            acts as an agent of the Centre. Through him/
            her, the Centre exercises control over the states.
            The American Constitution, on the contrary,
            provided for an elected head in the states. In
            this respect, India adopted the Canadian system.

            13. lntegrated Election Machinery
            The Election Commission conducts elections
            not only to the Central legislature but also to
            the state,legis l atur~s. But, this body is consti-
            tuted by the President and the states have no
            say in this matter. The position is same with
            regard to the removal of its members as well.
            On the other hand, US has separate machiner-
            ies for the conduct of elections at the federal
            and state levels.

            14. Veto Over State Bills
            The governor is empowered to reserve certain
            types of bills passed by the state legislature
            for the consideration of the President. The
            President can withhold his assent to such bills
            not only in the first instance but also in the
            second instance. Thus, the President enjoys
            absolute veto (and not suspensive veto) over
            state bills. But in US and Australia, the states
            are autonomous within their fields and there
            is no provision for any such reservation.

    CRITICAL EVALUATION OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM
        From the above, it is clear that the Consti,tu-
        tion of India has deviated from the traditional
        federal systems like US, Switzerland and
        Australia and incorporated a large number
        of unitary or non-federal features, tilting the
        balance of power in favour of the Centre. This
        has prompted the Constitutional experts to
        challenge the federal character of the Indian
        Constitution. Thus, KG Wheare described the
        Constitution of India as "quasi-federal". He
        remarked that "Indian Union is a unitary
        state with subsidiary federal features rather
        than a federal state with subsidiary unitary
        features (K.C, Wheare: Federal Government, 1951, p. 28).

        According to K Santhanam, the two factors
        have been responsible for increasing the uni-
        tary bias (tendency of centralisation) of the
        Constitution. These are: (i) the dominance
        of the Centre in the financial sphere and the
        dependence of the states upon the Central
        grants; and (ii) the emergence of a power-
        ful erstwhile planning commission which
        controlled the developmental process in the
        states6a. He observed: ~India has practically
        functioned as a unitary state though the
        Union and the states have tried to function
        formany and legally as a federation.(K. Santhanam; Union-State Relations in India, 1960,pp.50-70.)'
            ln 2615, the Planning Commission was replaced
            by a new body called the NITI Aayog (National
            Institution for Transforming India).

        However, there are other political scientists
        who do not agree with the above descriptions.
        Thus, Paul Appleby (Paul Appleby: Public Administration in India, 1953,
p.51.) characterises the Indian
        system as ~ex tr e m e l y federal". Morris Jones (Morris Jones: Tile GOlICnlmellt and Politics in India, 1960,p. 14.)
        termed it as a "bargain ing federalism "
        . Ivor Jennings ( lvo r Jennings: Some Characteristics of the Indian Constitu. tion, 1953, p. I.)
        lO has described it as a "federat ion
        with a stro ng cen t rali sing te ndency". He
        observed that U the India n Constitutio n is
        ma inly federal with unique safeguards for
        enforcing national un ity and growth". Alex-
        androwicz (C.H . AIexandrowicz: Constitu tional Development i 1l
India, 1957, pp. 1 57-70.) stated that "India is a case sui
        generis (i.e., u nique in character). Granville
        Austin (Cranvil.le A ustin: Tile Indiall COllstItutioll-
CornersfOne of a Nation , Oxford, 1966, pp. 186-88.) called the India n federalis m as a
        "cooperative federa lism". He said that though
        the Constitution of India has created a strong
        Cen tral government, it has not made the state
        governmen ts weak and has not reduced them
        to the level of administrative agencies for the
        execution of policies of the Central govern-
        ment. He described the Indi a n federation
        as "a new kind of federatio n to meet India's
        peculiar needs".

        On the nature of the India n Consti tu-
        tion, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar made the followi ng
        observa tion in the Constituent Assembly:
        "The Constitutio n is a Federal Constitution
        in as much as it establishes a dua l polity. The
        Union is not a league of states, united in a
        loose relationship, nor are the states the agen-
        cies of the Union, derivi ng powers from it.
        Both the Un ion a nd the states are created by
        the Constitution, both deri ve the ir respective
        authority from the Constitution. He further
        observed: "Yet the Constitution avoids the
        tight mould of federalis m and could be both
        unitary as well as federal accordi ng to the
        requirements of time a nd circu msta nces".
        Whil e replying to the criti cism of over-
        centralisation in the Constitution, he stated:
        " A serious complai nt is made o n the ground
        that there is too much centralisation a nd the
        states have been reduced to municipalities. It
        is clear that th is view is not only an exaggera-
        tio n but is also fou nded on a m isundersta nd-
        ing of what exactly the Constitution contri ves
        to do. As to the relations between the Cen tre
        and the states, it is necessary to bear in mind
        the fundamenta l princi ple on which it rests.
        The basic princi ple of federa lism is that the
        legislative and executive authority is par-
        titioned between the Ce ntre and the states
        not by a ny law to be made by the Centre but
        by the Constitution itself, This is what the
        Constitution does. The states are in no way
        dependent upon the Centre fo r their legisla-
        tive or executive authority. The states and
        the Centre are co-equal in this matter. It is
        di ffic ult to see how such a Co nstitution ca n
        be called ce ntralism . It is, therefore, wrong
        to say that the states have been placed under
        the Centre. The Centre cannot by its own will
        alter the boundary of this partition. Nor can
        the j udiciary".
            - Dr. B. R. Ambedkar's speech in the Constituent
            Asse mbly on 25. 11 .1949 reproduced in TIle
            ConstItutioll lIml tile Constituent Assembly; Lok
            Sabha Secreta riat, 1990, p. 176.

        In the Bommai case (S.R. Bommai vs. Union of India 1994), the Supreme
        Court la id down that the Constitution is fed-
        eral and characterised federa lism as its 'basic
        featu re'. It observed: "The fact that under the
        schem e of our Constitutio n, greater power
        is confer red upon the Centre l.Iis-a-l.Iis the
        states does not mean that the states are mere
        appendages of the Centre. The states have an
        independent constitutional existence. They
        a re not satell ites or agents of the Centre.
        Wi thi n the sphere allotted to them , the states
        are supreme. The fact that during emergency
        and in certa in other eventualities their powers
        are overridden or invaded by the Centre is not
        destructive of the essential federa l feature of
        the Constitution. They are exceptions and the
        exceptions are not a rule. Let it be said that the
        federalism in the Indian Constitution is not a
        matter of administrative convenience, but one
        of principle-the outcome of our own process
        and a recogn ition of the ground realities".

        In fact, the federalism in India represents
        a compromise between the following two
        conflicting considerations (Subash C. Kashyap: Our Parliament, National Book Trust, 1999 Edition, p. 40.)
        ':
            ( i) normal division of powers under which
            states enjoy autonomy within their own
            spheresj anq
            (ii) need for national integrity and a strong
            Union government under exceptional
            circumstances.

        The following trends in the working of
        India n political system reflects its federal
        spirit: (i) Thrritorial disputes between states, for
        example, between Maharashtra and Kamataka
        over Belgaumj (ii) Disputes between states over
        sharing of river water, for example, between
        Karnataka and Thmil Nadu over Cauvery waterj
        (iii) The emergence of regional parties and
        their coming to power in states like Andhra
        Pradesh, Thmil Nadu, etc.j (iv) The creation of
        new states to fulfil the regional aspirations, for
        example, Miwram or Jharkhand or Thlanganaj
        (v) Demand of the states for more financial
        grants from the Centre to meet their develop-
        mental needs; (vi) Assertion of autonomy by
        the states and their resistance to the interfer-
        ence from the Centrej (vii) Supreme Court's
        imposition of several proccdurallimitations on
        the use of. Article 356 (President's Rule in the
        States) by the Centre (S. R Bomlnai vs. Union of India, 1994).



CHAPTER 15: Centre-State Relations

    The Constitution of India, being federa l
    in structure, divides all powers (legisla-
    tive, executive and fina ncial) between
    the Centre and the states. However, there is no
    division of judicia 1 power as the Constitution
    has established an integrated judicial system
    to en fo rce both the Centra l laws as well as
    state laws.

    Though the Cen tre and the sta tes are
    supreme in their respective fields, the maxi-
    mum ha rmony and coordination between
    the m is esse ntia l for the effective o peration
    of the federal system. Hence, the Constitutio n
    co ntains elaborate provisions to regulate the
    various dimensions of the relations between
    the Centre and the sta tes.

    The Centre-state relatio ns ca n be studied
    under three heads:
        • Legislative relations.
        • Admin istrative relations.
        • Financia l relations.

    LEGISLATIVE RELATIONS
        Articles 245 to 255 in Pa rt Xl of the Constitu-
        tion deal with the legislative relations between
        the Cen tre a nd the states. Besides these, there
        are so me other articles dealing with the same
        subject.

        Like any other Federal Constitution, the
        Indian Constitution also divides the legislative
        powers between the Centre and the states with
        respect to both the territory and the subjects of
        legislation. Further, the Constitution provides
        for the parliamentary legislation in the state
        field under five extraordinary situations as well
        as the centre's control over state legislation in
        certain cases. Thus, there are four aspects in
        the Centre-states legislative relations, viz.,
            • Terristorial exten t of Central a nd state
            legislation;
            • Distribution of legislative subj ects;
            • Parliamentary legislation in the state
            field; and
            • Centre's control over state legislation.

        1. Territorial Extent of Central and State Legislation
            The Constitution defines the territorial limits
            of the legislative powers vested in the Centre
            and the states in the fo llowi ng way:

                (i) The Parliam ent ca n make laws for the
                who le or a ny part of the te rritory of
                Lndia. The territory of India includes
                the states, the union territories, and any
                other area for the time being incl uded
                in the territory o f India.

                (ij) A state legislature can make laws for
                the whole or any part of the state. The
                laws made by a state legislature are not
                applicable outside the state, except when
                there is a suffi cient nexus between the
                state and the object.

                (iii) The Pa rliament alo ne ca n make 'extra-
                territorial legislation '. Thus, the laws of
                the Pa rlia ment are a lso applicable to
                the Indian citize ns and their property
                in an y part of the world.

            However, the Constitution places certain
            restrictions on the plenary territoria l juris-
            diction of the Parlia ment. In other words, the
            laws of Parliament are not applicable in the
            following areas:
                (i) The President can make regulations
                for the peace, progress and good gov-
                ernment of the Union Thrritories of
                the Andaman and Nicobar Islands,
                Lakshadweep, Dadra and Nagar Haveli
                and Da man and Diu and Ladakh. In the
                case of Puducherry also, the President
                can legislate by making regulations but
                only when the Assembly is suspended
                or dissolved. A regulation so made has
                the same force and effect as an act of
                Parliament. It may also repeal or amend
                any act of Parliame nt in relat ion to
                these union territories.

                (ii) The governor is empowered to direct that
                an act of Pa rliament does not apply to a
                scheduled area in the state or apply with
                specified modifications a nd exceptions.
                (iii) The Governor of Assa m may likewise
                direct that an act of Parliament does
                not apply to a tribal area (autonomous
                district) in the state or apply with speci-
                fi ed modifications and exceptions. The
                President enjoys the same power with
                respect to tribal areas (autonomous
                districts) in Meghalaya, Tripura and
                Mizoram .

        2. Distribution of Legislative Subjects
            The Constitution provides for a three-fold dis-
            tribution of legislative subjects between the
            Centre and the states, viz. , List-I (the Union
            List), List-II (the State List) and List-HI (the
            Concurrent List) in the Seventh Schedule:
                (i) The Parlia ment has exclusive powers to
                make laws with respect to any of the
                matters enumerated in the Union List.
                This list has at present 98 subjects (orig-
                inally 97 subjects) like defence, ba nk-
                ing, fore ign affairs, currency, atomic
                en e rgy, in sura n ce, communication ,
                inter-state trade and commerce, census,
                audit and so on.
                    - Even now, the last entry is numbered as 97 but the
                    total number of entries is 98. The entries numbered
                    as 2A, 92A and 9ZB have been added and entries 33,
                    92 and 92C have been omitted.

                (ii) The state legislature has "in normal cir-
                cumsta nces" exclusive powers to make
                laws with respect to any of the matters
                enumerated in the State List. This has
                at present 59 subjects (originally 66
                subjects) like public order, police, pub-
                lic health and sanitation, agriculture,
                prisons, local government, fish eries, .
                markets, theaters, gambling and so on .
                    - Even now, the last entry is numbered as 66 but the
                    total number of entries is 59. The entries numbered
                    as 11 , 19, 20, 29, 36, 52 and 55 have been omitted

                (iii) Both, the Pa rlia ment a nd state legis-
                lature can make laws with respect to
                any of the matters enumerated in the
                Concurrent List. This list has at present
                52 subjects (originally 47 subjects) like
                criminal law and procedure, civil proce-
                dure, marriage and divorce, population
                control and family planning, electric-
                ity, labour welfare, economic and social
                planning, drugs, newspapers, books and
                printing press, a nd others. The 42nd
                Amendment Act of 1976 transferred fi ve
                subjects to Concurrent List from State
                List, that is, (a) education, (b) forests,
                (c) weights and measures, (d) protec-
                tion of wild animals and birds, and (c)
                administration of just ice; constitution
                and organisation of all courts except the
                Supreme Court and the high courts.
                    - Even now, the last entry is numbered as 47 but the
                    total number of entries is 52. The entries numbered
                    as llA, 17A, 17B, 20A and 33A have been added.

                (iv) The Parliament has power to make laws
                with respect to any matter for any part
                of the territory of India not included in a
                state even though that matter is one which
                is enumerated in the State List. This provi-
                sion has reference to the Union Thrritories
                or the Acquired Thrritories (if any).

                (v) The 101 st Amendment Act of 2016 has
                made a special provision with respect
                to goods and services tax. Accordingly,
                the Parliament and the state legislature
                have power to make laws with respect
                to goods and services tax imposed by
                the Union or by the State. Further, the
                parliament has exclusive power to make
                laws with respect to goods and services
                tax where the supply of goods or ser-
                vices or both takes place in the course
                of inter-state trade or commerce.
                
                (vi) The power to make Jaws with respect to
                residuary subjects (i.e., the matters which
                are not enumerated in any of the th ree
                lists) is vested in the Parliament. This
                residuary power of legislation includes
                the power to levy residuary l:.:1.xes.

            From the above scheme, it is clear that the
            matters of national importance and the mat-
            ters which require uniformity of legislation
            natio nwide are included in the Union List. The
            matlers of regional and local importance and
            the matters which permit diversity of interest
            are speci fied in the State List. The matters on
            which uniformity of legislation throughout
            the country is desirable but not essential are
            enumerated in the concurrent list. Thus, it
            permits diversity along with uniformity.
            In US, only the powers of the Federal Gov-
            ernment are enumerated in the Constitution
            and the residuary powers are left to the sta tes.
            The Australian Constitution fo llowed the
            American pattern of single enumeration of
            powers. In Ca nada, on the other hand, there
            is a double enumeration-Federal a nd Provin-
            cial, a nd the residuary powers are vested in
            the Centre.

            The Government of India Act of ] 935 pro-
            vided for a three-fold enumeration, viz., fed-
            eral, provincial and concurrent. The present
            Constitution follows the scheme of this act
            but with one difference, that is, under this
            act, the residuary powers were given neither
            to the federal legislature nor to the provin-
            cial legislature but to the Governor-General
            of India. In this respect, India follows the
            Canadia n precedent.

            The Constitution expressly secures the pre-
            dominance of the Union List over the State
            List and the Concurrent List and that of the
            Concurren t List over the State List. Thus, in
            case of overlapping between the Union List
            and the State List, the former should prevail.
            In case of overlapping between the Union List
            ,md the Concurrent List, it is again the former
            which should prevail. Where there is a confl ict
            between the Concurrent List and the State List,
            it is the former that should prevail.

            In case of a conflict between the Central law
            and the state law on a subject enumerated in
            the Concurrent List, the Central law prevails
            over the state law. But, there is an exception.
            If the state law has been reserved for the con-
            sideration of the President and has received
            his/her assent, then the state law prevails in
            that state. But, it would still be competent for
            the Parliament to override such a law by sub-
            sequently making a law on the sa me matter.

        3. Parliamentary Legislation in the State Field
            The above scheme of distribution of legisla-
            tive powers between the Centre and the states
            is to be maintained in normal times. But, in
            abnormal times, the scheme of distribution is
            either modified or suspended. In other words,
            the Constitution empowers the Parliament to
            make laws on any matter enumerated in the
            State List under the following five extraordi-
            nary circumsta nces:

                A. When Rajya Sabha Passes a Resolution If
                    the Rajya Sabha declares that it is necessary in
                    the national interest that Parliament should
                    make laws with respect to goods and services
                    tax or a matter in the State List, then the
                    Parliament becomes co mpetent to make laws
                    on that matter. Such a resolution must be sup-
                    ported by two-thirds of the me mbers present
                    and voting. The resolution rema ins in force
                    for one year; it can be renewed any number
                    of times but not exceeding one year at a time.
                    The laws cease to have effect on the expira-
                    tion of six months after the resolution has
                    ceased to be in force.
                    This provision does not restrict-the power
                    of a state legislature to make laws on the same
                    matter. But, in case of inconsistency between
                    a state law and a parliamentary law, the latter
                    is to prevai1.
                        - The provision for goods and services tax was added
                        by the 101 st Amendment Act of 2016.

                B. During a National Emergency The
                    Parliament acquires the power to legislate
                    with respect to goods an servlces tax (Ibid) or
                    matters in the State List, while a proclama-
                    tion of national emergency is in operation.
                    The laws become inoperative on the expira-
                    tion of six months after the emergency has
                    ceased to operate.
                    Here also, the power of a state legislature
                    to make laws on the same matter is not
                    restricted. But, in case of repugnancy between
                    a state law and a parliamentary law, the latter
                    is to prevail.

                C. When States Make a Request When
                    the legislatures of two or more states pass
                    resolutions requesting the Parliament to
                    enact laws on a matter in the State List, then
                    the Parliament can make laws for regulating
                    that matter. A law so enacted applies only to
                    those states which have passed the resolutions.
                    However, any other state may adopt it after-
                    wards by passing a resolution to that effect in
                    its legislature. Such a law can be amended or
                    repealed only by the Parliament and not by
                    the legislatures of the concerned states.

                    The effect of passing a resolution under
                    the above provision is that the Parliament
                    becomes entitled to legislate with respect to
                    a matter for which it has no power to make a
                    law. On the other hand, the state legislature
                    ceases to have the po\ver 'to make a law with
                    respect to that matter, The resolution oper-
                    ates as abdication or surrender of the power
                    of the state legislature with respect to that ·
                    matter and it is placed entirely in the hands
                    of Parliament which alone can then legislate
                    *ith respect to it .

                    Some examples of laws passed under the
                    above provision are Priz'e Competition Act,
                    19S5j Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972j Water
                    (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act,
                    1974j Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation)
                    Act, 1976j and Transplantation of Human
                    Organs Act, 1994.

                D. To Implement International Agreements
                    The Parliament can make laws on any matter
                    in the ~tate List for' implementing the inter-
                    national treaties, agreements or conventions.
                    This provision enables the Central govern-
                    ment to fulfil its international obligations
                    and commitments.
                    Some examples of laws enacted under the
                    abov,e provision are United Nations (Privileges
                    and Immunities) Act, 1947; Geneva Convention
                    Act, 1960; Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982 and legisla-
                    tions relating to environment and TRJPS.

                E. During President's Rule When the
                    President's rule is imposed in a s!4te, the
                    Parliament becomes empowered to make laws
                    with respect to any matter in the State List in
                    relation to that state. A law made so by the
                    Parliament continues to be operative even
                    after the president's " rule. This means that the
                    period for which such a law remains in force
                    is not coterminous with the duration of the
                    President's rule. But, such a law can be repealed
                    or altered or re-enacted by the state legislature.

        4. Centre's Control Over State Legislation
            Besides the Parliament's power to legislate
            directly on the state subjects under the excep-
            tional situations"
            , the Constitution empowers
            the Centre to exercise control over the state's
            legislative matters in the following ways:

                (i) The Governor can reserve a bill ~assed. by
                the state legislature for the conSideratIon
                of the President. It must be noted here
                that the President enjoys absolute veto
                over such a bill (Articles 200 and 201).

                (ii) A state bill imposing restrictions o.n the
                freedom of trade, commerce and mter-
                course with that state or within that
                state can be introduced in the legislature
                of the state only with the previous sanc-
                tion of the President (Article 304).

                (iii) The Centre ca n direct the sta tes to
                reserve money bills and other financial
                bills passed by the sta te legislature for
                the President's consideration during a
                finan cia l emergency (A rticle 360).

                (iv) The Governor c.ln not make an ordi-
                nance without the instructions from the
                President in cerulin cases (Article 213).

            From the above, it is cleM that the Co nsti-
            tution has assigned a position of superiority
            to the Centre in the legislative sphere. In this
            context, the Sa rkaria Co mm ission on Centre-
            State Rela tions ( 1983-88) obsen'ed: "The rule
            of federa l supremacy is a technique to avoid
            absurd ity, resolve conflict a nd ensure har-
            mony between the Un ion and state laws. If
            this principle of union supremacy is excluded,
            it is not difficult to imagine its deleterious
            results. There will be every possibi li ty of our
            two-tier political system bei ng stultified by
            interference, strife, legal chaos and con fusion
            caused by (l host of conflicti ng laws, much
            to the bewilderment of the common citizen.
            Integrated legislati ve policy and unifonnity on
            basic issues of co mmon Unio n-state concern
            will be stym ied. The federal principle of unity
            in diversity will be very much a casualty. This
            rule of fede ral supremacy, therefore, is indis-
            pensable for the successful functioning of the
            federal system.
                - Report of the Com mission o n centre-state Relations,
                Part I (Government of lndia, 1988) pp. 28-29.

    ADMINISTRATIVE RELATIONS
        Articles 256 to 263 in Part XI of the Constitu-
        tio n dea l with the admin istrative relations
        between the Cen tre and the states. In addi-
        tion, there are vario us other articles pertain-
        ing to the sa me matter.

        1. Distribution of Executive Powers
            The execu tive powe r has bee n di vided
            between the Centre a nd the states on the
            lines of the distribution of legislative powers
            except in few cases. Thus, the execll tive power
            of the Centre extends to the whole of India:
                (i) to the matters on which the Parliament
                has exclusive power of legislation ( Le., the
                subjects en umerated in the Union List); and

                (ii) to the exercise of rights, authority and
                jurisdict ion conferred on it by any treaty o r
                agreement. Simila rl y, the executive power of
                a state exte nds to its territory in respect of
                matters on which the state legislature has
                exclusive power of legislation (Le., the sub-
                j ects e numerated in the State List).
                
            In respect of matters on which both the
            Parliam ent a nd the state legislatu res have
            power of legislat ion ( i.e., the subjects enumer-
            ated in the Concurrent List), the executive
            power rests with the states except when a Con-
            stitutional provision or a parl iamen tary law
            specifically co nfers it on the Centre. There-
            fore, a law on a concurrent subject, though
            enacted by the Pa rliament, is to be executed
            by the states except when the Constitution o r
            the Parl ia men t has directed otherwise.
                - For example, under the Essential Commoditics Act,
                made by the Parliament. on a concurrcnt subject,
                the executive power is vested in the centre.

        2. Obligation of States and the Centre
            The Constitution has placed two restrictions
            on the executive power of the states in o rder to
            give ample scope to the Centre for exercising
            its executi ve power in a n unrestricted manner.
            Thus, the executive power of every slate is to
            be exercised in such a way (a) as to ensure
            compliance with the laws made by the Parlia-
            ment and any existing law which apply in the
            state; and (b) as not to impede or prejudice
            the exercise of executive power of the Centre in
            the state. While the former lays down a general
            obligation upo n the state, the latter imposes a
            specific obl igation on the state not to hamper
            the executive power of the Centre.

            In both the cases, the executive power of
            the Centre extends to giv ing of such direc-
            tions to the state as are necessa ry for the
            purpose. The sanction behind these directions
            of the Centre is coercive in naturc. Thus, Arti-
            cle 365 says that where a ny state has failed to
            comply wit~ (or to give effect to) any direc·
            tions given by the Centre, it will be lawful
            for the President to hold that a situation has
            arisen in which the government of the state
            ca nnot be carried on in accordance with the
            provisions of the Constitution. It means that,
            in such a situation, the President's rule can
            be imposed in the state under Article 356.

        3. Centre's Directions to the States
            in addition to the above two cases, the Centre
            is empowered to give directions to the states
            with regard to the exercise of their executive
            power in the following matters:
                (i) the construction and maintenance of
                means of communication (declared to
                be of national or military importance)
                by the state; .

                (ii) the measures to be taken for the protec·
                tion of the railways within the state;
                
                (iii) the provision of adequate facilities for
                instruction in the mother·tongue at the
                primary stage of education to children
                belonging to linguistic minority groups
                in the state; and
                
                (iv) the drawing up and execution of the
                specified schemes for the welfare of the
                Scheduled Tribes in the state.

            The coercive sanction behind the Central
            directions under Article 365 (mentioned
            above) is also applicable in these cases.

        4. Mutual Delegation of Functions
            The distribution of legislative powers between
            the Centre and the states is rigid. Conse-
            quently, the Centre cannot delegate its legis-
            lative powers to the states 'and a single state
            cannot request the Parliament to make a law
            on a state subject. The distribution of execu-
            tive power in general follows the distribution
            of legislative powers. But, such a rigid divi-
            sion in the executive sphere may lead to occa-
            sional conflicts between the two. Hence, the
            Constitution provides for inter-government
            delegation of executive functions in order
            to mitigate rigidity and avoid a situation of
            deadlock.

            Accordingly, the President may, with the
            consent of the state government, entrust to
            that government any of the executive func-
            tions of the Centre. Conversely, the governor
            of a state may, with the consent of the Central
            government, entrust to that government any
            of the · executive functions of the state. This
            mutual delegation of administrative functions
            may be conditional or unconditional.
                - This provision (the power of the states to entrust
                functions to the Centre) was added by the 7th
                Constitutional Amendment Act of 1956. Before
                that, only the Centre had the power.

            The Constitution also makes a provision
            for the entrustment of the executive functions
            of the Centre to a state without the consent of
            that state. But, in this case, the delegation is by
            the Parliament and not by the president. Thus,
            a law made by the Parliament on a subject of
            th~ Union List can confer powers and impose
            duties on a state, or authorise the conferring of
            powers and imposition of duties by the Centre
            upon a state (irrespective of the consent of the
            state concerned). Notably, the same thing can-
            not be done by the state legislature.

            From the above, it is clear that the mutual
            delegation of fun ctions between the Centre
            and the state can take place either under
            an agreement or by a legislation. While the
            Centre can use both the methods, a state can
            use only the first method.

        5. Cooperation detween the Centre and States
            The Constitution contains the following pro-
            visions to sec'ure cooperation and coordina-
            tion between the Centre a nd the states:
                (i) The Parliament can provide for the adju·
                dication of any dispute or complaint
                with respect to the use, distribution and
                control of waters of any inter-state river
                and river valley.

                (ii) The President ca n establish (under
                Article 263) an Inter-State Council to
                investigate and discuss subject of com-
                mon interest between the Centre a nd the
                states. Such a council was set up in 1990.

                (iii) Full faith and credit is to be given
                throughout the territory of India to pub-
                lic acts, records and judicial proceedi ngs
                of the Centre and every state.

                (iv) The Parliament can appoint an appro-
                priate authority to carry out the pur-
                poses of the con stitutional provisions
                relating to the interstate freedom of
                trade, commerce and intercourse. But,
                no such authority has been appointed
                so far.

        6. All India Services
            Like in any other federation, the Centre and
            the states also have their separate publiC ser-
            vices called as the Central Services and the
            State Services respectively. In addition, there
            arc All-India Services-lAS, IPS and IFaS. The
            members of these services occupy top posi-
            tions (or key posts) under both the Centre and
            the states and serve them by turns. But, they
            are recruited and trained by the Centre.

            These serv ices are controlled jointly by the
            Centre and the states. The ultimate control
            lies with the Central government while the
            immediate control vests with the state govern-
            ments.

            In 1947, Indian Civil Service (ICS) was
            replaced by lAS and the Indian Police (IP)
            was replaced by IPS and were recognised by
            the Constitution as All-India Services. In 1966,
            the Indian Forest Service (IFoS) was created
            as the third All-India Service. Article 312 of
            the Constitution authorises the Parliament to
            create new All-India Services on the basis of
            a Rajya Sabha resolution to that effect.

            Each of these three All-India Services,
            irrespective of their division among different
            states, form a single service with common
            rights and status and uniform scales of pay
            throughout the country.

            Though the All-India Services violate the
            principle of federalism under the Constitution
            by restricting the autonomy and patronage of
            the states, they are supported on the ground
            that (i) they help in maintHining high standard
            of administration in the Centre as well as in the
            states; (ii) they help to ensure uniformity of the
            administrative system throughout the country;
            and (iii) they facilitate liaison, cooperation,
            coordination and joint action on the issues
            of common interest between the Centre and
            the states.

            While justifying the institution of all-India
            services in the Constituent Assembly, Dr. B.R.
            Ambedkar observed that: "The dual polity
            which is inherent in a federal system is fol-
            lowed in all federations by a dual service. In
            all federations, there is a Federal Civil Service
            and a State Civil Service. The Indian federa-
            tion, though a dual polity, will have a dual
            service, but with one exception. It is recog-
            nised that in every country there are certain
            posts in its administrative set up which might
            be called strategic from the point of view of
            maintaining the standard of administration.
            There can be no doubt that the standard of
            administration depends upon the calibre of
            the civil servants who are appointed to the
            strategic posts. The Constitution provides that
            without depriving the states of their rights
            to form their own civil serv ices, there shall
            be an all-India service, recruited on an all-
            India basis with common qualifications, with
            uniform scale of pay and members of which
            alone could be appointed to those strategic
            posts throughout the Union.

        7. Public Service Commissions
            In the field of public service commissions, the
            Centre-state relations are as follows:
                (i) The Chairman and members of a state
                public service commission, though
                appointed by the governor of the state,
                can be removed only by the President.

                (ii) The Parliament can establish a Joint St.1.te
                Public Service Commission (JSPSC) for
                two or more states on the request of the
                state legislatures concerned. The chair-
                man and members of the JSPSC are
                appointed by the President.
                
                (iii) The Un ion Public Service Commission
                (UPSC) can serve the needs of a state
                on the request of the state governor and
                with the approval of the President.
                
                (iv) The upse ass ists the states (wh e n
                requested by two or more states) in
                framing and operating schemes of joint
                recruitment for a ny services for which
                candidates possessing special qualifica-
                tions are required.

        8. Integrated Judicial System
            Though India has a dual po1ity, there is no
            dual system of administration of justice.
            The Con stitution, on the other hand, estab-
            lished an integrated judicial system with the
            Supreme Court at the top and the state high
            courts below it. This single system of courts
            enforces both the Central laws as well as the
            state laws. This is done to eliminate diversi-
            ties in the remedial procedure.
            
            Th e judges of a state high court a re
            appointed by the President in consultation
            with the Chief Justice of India a nd the gover-
            nor of the state. They can also be transferred
            and removed by the President.

            The Pa rliame nt can establish a co m -
            mon high court for two or more states. For
            example, Maharashtra and Goa or Punjab and
            Haryana have a common high court.

        9. Relations During Emergencies
            (i) During the operation of a national emer-
            gency (under Article 352) , the Centre
            becomes entitled to give executive direc-
            tions to a state on 'any' matter. Thus, the
            state governments are brought under the
            complete control of the Centre, though
            they are not suspended.

            (ii) When the President's Rule is imposed in
            a state (under Article 356), the President
            can assume to himself/herself the func-
            tions of the state government and PO\V-
            ers vested in the Governor or any other
            executive authority in the state.
            
            (iii) During the ' operation of a financia l
            e mergency ( under Article 360), the
            Centre can direct the states to observe
            canons of financial propriety and ca n
            give other necessary directions includ-
            ing the reduction of salaries of persons
            serving in the state.

        10. Other Provisions 
            The Constitution contains the following other
            provisions wh ich enable the Cen tre to exer-
            cise control over the state administration:
                (i) Article 355 imposes two duties o n the
                Centre: (a) to protect every state against
                external aggression and internal dis-
                turbance; and (b) to ensure that the
                government of every state is carried on
                in accordance with the provisions of the
                Constitution.

                (ii) The governor of a state is appointed by
                the President. He/ she holds office during
                the pleasure of the President. In addi-
                tion to the Constitutional head · of the
                state, the governor acts as an agent of
                the Centre in the state. He/ she submits
                periodical reports to the Centre about the
                administrative affairs of the state.

                (iii) The state election commissioner, though
                appointed by the governor of the state,
                can be removed only by the President.

        11. Extra-Constitutional Devices
            In addition to the above-mentioned constitu-
            tional devices, there are extra-constitu tional
            devices to promote cooperation and coordi na-
            tion between the Centre and the states. These
            include a number of advisory bodies and
            conferences held at the Central level.

            The non-constitutional advisory bodies
            include the NIT! Ayog (which succeeded the
            pla nning commission ), the National Integra-
            tion Council, the Central Council of Health
            and Family Welfare, the Central Council of
            Local Government, the Zonal Councils, the
            North-Eastern Council, the Central Council
            of Indian Medicine, the Central Council of
            Hom oeopathy, the Transport Development
            Council, the University Grants Commission
            and so on.

            The impo rta nt co nferences h eld either
            annually or otherwise to facilitate Centre-
            state consultation on a wide range of matters
            are as follows: (i) The governors' confer-
            ence (presided over by the President). (ii)
            The chief ministers' conference (presided
            over by the prime minister). (iii) The chief
            secretaries' confe rence (presided over by the
            cabinet secretary). (iv) The co nference of
            inspector-gene ral of police. (v) The chief
            j ustices' conference (presided over by the
            chief justice of India). (vi) The confere nce
            of vice-cha ncellors. (vii) The home minis-
            ters' co nference (presided over by the Central
            home ministe r). (viii) The law ministers'
            co nference (presided over by the Central law
            minister).

    FINANCIAL RELATIONS
        Articles 268 to 293 in Part XI I of the Consti-
        tuti on deal with Centre-state finan cial rela-
        tions. B esides these, there a re other provisions
        dea ling with the sa me subject. These together
        can be stud ied under the fo llowing heads:

            1. Allocation of Taxing Powers
                The Constitution divides the taxing powers
                between the Centre a nd the states in the fol-
                lowing way:
                    • The Parl iament has exclusive power to
                    levy taxes on subjects enumerated in the
                    Un ion List (which are 13 in number).
                        - Entries-82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92A, 92B and 96.

                    • The state legislature has exclusive power
                    to levy taxes on subj ects enum erated in
                    the State List (which are 18 in number).
                        - Entries-45, 46, 47, 48. 49. 50, 51,53,54,56,57,58, 59. 60, 61, 62, 63 and 66.
                    
                    • There are no tax entries in the Concurrent
                    List. In other words, the concurrent juris-
                    diction is not ilVaiiable with respect to tax
                    legislation. But, the 101 st Amendment Act
                    of2016 has made an exception by making
                    a special provision with respect to goods
                    and services tax. This Amendment has
                    conferred concurrent power upon the
                    Parliament and St.'lte Legislatures to make
                    laws govern ing goods and services tax.
                        - In this regard, the 101'st Amendment Act of 2016
                        inserted Article 246-A in the Co nstitution
                    
                    • The residuary power of taxation (that is,
                    the power to impose Lues not enumer-
                    ated in a ny of the three lists) is vested in
                    the Parliament. Under this provision, the
                    Parlia ment has imposed gift tax, wealth
                    tax and expenditure tax.

        The Constitution also draws a distinction
        between the power to levy and collect a t.1X
        and the power to appropriate the proceeds of
        the tax so levied and collected. For example,
        the income-tax is levied and collected by the
        Centre but its proceeds are distributed between
        the Centre and the states.

        Further, the Constitution has placed the
        fo llowing restrictions on the taxing powers
        of the states:

            (i) A state legislature can impose taxes on
            professions, trades, ca llings and e mploy-
            ments. But, the total a mount of such
            taxes payable by any person should not
            exceed 2,5OO per annum .
                - Origina lly, this limit was o nly 250 per annum.
                The 60th Amendment Act of 1988 ra ised it to
                2,500 per annum.

            (ii) A state legislature is prohibited from
            imposi ng a tax on the supply of goods
            or services or both in the following
            two cases: (a) where such su ppl y
            takes place outside the state; and (b)
            where such supply takes place in the
            cou rse of import or export. Further, the
            Parliame nt is empowered to formulate
            the principles for determi ning when a
            supply of goods or services or both takes
            place outside the state, or in the course
            of import or export .
                - These prov isions Me contained in Article 286, as
                amended by the JOi st Amendment Act of 2016.

            (iii) A state legislature can impose tax on
            the consumption or sa le of electricity.
            But, no tax ca n be imposed on the con-
            sumption or sale of electricity which
            is (.iii) consumed by the Centre or sold
            to the Ce ntre; or (b) consumed in the
            construction, maintenance or operation
            of any railway by the Centre or by the
            concerned railway company or sold to
            the Centre or the ra ilway company for
            the sa me purpose.

            (iv) A sta te legislature can impose a tax in
            respect of any water or electricity stored,
            ge ne rated, co nsu med, distributed or
            old by any authority established by
            Parliament for regulating or develop·
            iog any inter-state river or river vaHey.
            But, such a law, to be effective, should
            be reserved for the president's consider-
            ation and receive his/ her assent.

    2. Distribution of Tax Revenues
        The 80th Amendment Act of 2000 and the
        101st Amendment Act of 2016 have introduced
        major changes in the scheme of the distribu-
        tion of tax revenues between the centre and
        the states.

        The 80th ,Amendment was enacted to give
        effect to the recommendations of the 10th
        fina nce Commission. The Commission recom-
        mended that out of the total income obtained
        from certain central taxes and duties, 29%
        should go to the states. This is known as the
        'Alternative Scheme of Devolution' a nd came
        into effect retrospectively from April I, 1996.
        This amendment has brought several central
        taxes and duties like Corporation lax and
        Customs Duties at par with Income 13x (taxes
        on income other than agricultural income) as
        far as their constitutionally mandated sharing
        with the states is concerned.
            - This amendment deleted Article 272 (Taxes which
            are levied and collected by the Centre and may be
            distributed between the Centre and the states).

        The 101st Amendment has paved the way
        for the introduction of a new tax regime (Le.,
        goods and services tax - GST) in the country.
        Accordingly, the Amendment conferred concur-
        ren t taxing powers upon the Parliament and
        the State Legislatures to make laws for levying
        GST on every transaction of supply of goods or
        services or both. The GST replaced a number
        of indirect taxes levied by the Union and the
        State Governments and is intended to remove
        the cascading effect of taxes and provide for a
        common national market for goods and ser-
        vices. The Amendment provided for subsum-
        ing of various central indirect taxes and levies
        such as (i) Central Excise Duty, (ii) Additional
        Excise ' Duties, (iii) Excise Duty levied under
        the Medicinal and Thilet Preparations (Excise
        Duties) Act, 1955, (iv) Service Thx, (v) Addi-
        tional Customs Duty commonly known as
        Countervailing Duty, (vi) Special Additional
        Duty of Customs, and (vii) Central Surcharges
        and Cesses so far as they related to the supply
        of goods and services. Similarly, the Amend-
        ment provided for subsuming of (i) State Value
        Added 13x / Sales 13x, (ii) Entertainment 13x
        (other than the tax levied by the local bodies),
        (iii) Central Sales Thx (levied by the Centre and
        collected by the States), (iv) Octroi and Entry
        Thx, (v) Purchase Thx, (vi) Luxury Thx, (vii)
        Thxes on lottery, betting and gambling, and
        (viii) State Surcharges and Cesses in so far as
        they related to the supply of goods and services.
        Further, the Amendment deleted Article 268-A
        as well as Entry 92-C in the Union List, both
        were dealing with service tax. They were added
        earlier by the 88th Amendment Act of 2003.
        The service tax was levied by the Centre but
        collected 'and appropriated by both the Centre
        and the States.

        After the above two amendments (Le. , 80th
        Amendment and 101 st Amendment), the pres-
        ent position with respect to the distribution
        of tax revenues between the centre and the
        states is as follows:

            A. Taxes Levied by the Centre but Collected
            and Appropriated by the States (Article 268):
            This category includes the stamp duties on bil1s
            of exchange, cheques, promissory notes, poli-
            cies of insurance, transfer of shares and others.
            The proceeds of these duties levied within
            any state do not form a part of the Consoli-
            dated Fund of India, but are assigned to that
            state.

            B. Taxes Levied and Collected by the Centre
            but Assizned to the States (Article 269) :
            The following taxes fa ll under this category:
                (i) 13xes on the sale or purchase of goods
                (other than newspapers) in the course
                of inter·state trade or commerce.
                (ii) laxes on the consignment of goods in the
                course of inter-state trade or commerce.
            The net proceeds of these taxes do not fonn
            a part of the Consolidated Fu nd of India.
            They are assigned to the concerned states in
            acco rda nce with the pri nciples laid down by
            the Pa rl iamen t.

            C . Levy and Collection of Goods and
            Services Tax in Course of Inter-State Trade
            or Commerce (Article 269-A); The Goods
            and Services Thx (CST) on supplies in the
            course of inter-sta te trade o r commerce are
            levied and collected by the Ce ntre. But, this
            tax is divided between the Cen tre and the
            States in the manner provided by Parliam ent
            o n the reco mm endations of the GST Council.
            F'urther, the Parliament is a lso authorized to
            formu late the prin ciples for determining the
            place of supply, and whe n a supply of goods
            o r services or both takes place in the course
            of inter-state trade or Commerce.

            D. Taxes Levied and Collected by the Centre
            but Distributed between the Centre and the
            States (Article 270): This category includes
            all taxes a nd duties referred to in the Un ion
            List except the fo llowi ng:
                ( i) Duties lind taxes refer red to in Articles
                268, 269 and 269-A (menti oned above);
                ( ii) Surcharge on taxes and duties referred to
                in Article 271 (mentioned below); and
                (iii) Any cess lev ied ror specific purposes.
            The manner of distributio n of the net pro-
            ceeds of these taxes a nd duties is prescribed
            by the President on the recommendation of
            the Finance Commission.
                - Entry 52 (taxes on the entry of goods into a local area
                for consumption, use o r sale therein) and entry 55
                (taxes on advertisements other than advertisements
                published in the newspapers and adve rtisements
                broadcast by radio or telev isio n) were omitted by the
                101 st Amendment Act of 2016.

            E. Surcharge on Certain Taxes and Duties
            for Purposes of the Centre (Article 271) :
            The Parliamen t can at a ny time levy the
            surcha rges on taxes and duties referred to in
            Articles 269 a nd 270 ( mentioned above). The
            proceeds of such surcharges go to the Cent re
            exclusively. In other words, the states have no
            share in these surcharges.
            However, the Goods and Services 13x (GST)
            is exempted from this surcharge. In other
            words, this surcharge ca n not be imposed on
            the CST.

            F. Taxes Levied and Collected and Retained
            by the States: These a rc the taxes belong-
            i ng to t he states excl us ively. They are
            enu m erated in the st<lte li st and are 18
            in n umber. These are: (i) land revenue;
            (ii) taxes on agricultura l income; (iii) duties
            in respect of succession to agricul tura l la nd;
            ( iv) estate duty in respect of agricultural
            land; (v) taxes on lands and bui ldings;
            (v i) taxes on mineral rights; (vii) Dut ies
            of excise o n alcoholic liquors fo r human
            consum pt ion; op ium , Indian hemp and
            o ther narcoti c drugs a nd narcotics, but not
            incl uding medicina l a nd toilet prepa ra tions
            co ntainin g alcoho l o r narcot ics; (viii) taxes
            on the co nsumpti o n or sa le or electrici ty;
            (ix) taxes o n the sa le of petroleum crude,
            h igh speed diesel, motor spirit (co mmonly
            known as petrol), natura l gas, €Iv iation tur-
            bine fue l and alcoholic liquor for human
            co nsumption , but not including sale in the
            course of inter-state trade or com me rce or
            sale in the course of internatio nal trade or
            com merce of such goods; (x) taxes on goods
            a nd passengers ca rried by road or in land
            waterways; (xi) taxes o n vehicles; (xii) taxes
            on a ni ma ls and boats; (xiii) tolls; (xiv) taxes
            on professions, trades, ca ll ings a nd emp loy-
            me n ts; (xv) cap itation taxes; (xvi) taxes
            on enterta inm ents a nd a muse ments to the
            extent lev ied and collected by a Pa nchayat
            or a Munic ipality or a Regional Councilor a
            District Coun cil ; (x vii) sta mp duty on docu-
            ments (except those specifi ed in the Unio n
            List); and (xviii) fees on the matte rs en u-
            merated in the Sta te List (except court fees).

        3. Distribution of Non-tax Revenues
            A. The Centre The receipts from the fo llow-
            ing form the major sources of non-tax rev-
            en ues of the Centre: ( i) posts and telegraphs;
            (ii) railways; (iii) banking; (iv) broadcasting
            (v) coinage ilnd currency; (vi) central public
            sector enterprises; (vii) escheat and lapse;
            a nd ("iii) others.

            B. The States The receipts from the follow-
            ing form the major sources of non-tax rev-
            enues of the states: (i) irrigation; (ii) forests;
            (iii) fisheries; (iv) state public sector enter-
            prises; (v) escheat and lapse; and (vi) others.

        4. Grants-in-Aid to the States
            Besides sharing of taxes between the Centre
            and the states, the Constitution provides for
            grants-in-aid to the states from the Central
            resources. There are two types of grants-in-aid,
            viz, statutory grants and discretionary grants:
                A. Statutory Crants Article 275 empowers
                    the Parliament to make grants to the states
                    which are in need of financial assistance and
                    not to every state. Also, different sums may
                    be fixed for different states. These sums are
                    charged on the Consolidated Fund of India
                    every year.

                    Apart from this general provision, the
                    Constitution also provides for speCific grants
                    for promoting the welfare of the scheduled
                    tribes in a stale or for raising the level of
                    administration of the scheduled areas in a
                    state including the State of Assa m.

                    The statutory grants under Article 275
                    (both general and specific) are given to the
                    states on the recommendation of the Finance
                    Commission.

                B. Discretionary Grants Article 282 empow-
                    ers both the Centre and the states to make
                    any grants for any public purpose, eve n if
                    it is not within their respective legislative
                    competence. Undet· this provision, the Centre
                    makes grants to the states.

                    "These grants are also known as discretion-
                    ary grants, the reason being that the Centre is
                    under no obligation to give these grants and
                    the matter lies within its discretion. These
                    grants have a two-fol d purpose: to help the
                    state financially to fulfil plan targets; and to
                    give some leverage to the Centre to influence
                    and coordinate state action to effectuate the
                    national plan." 
                        - M.P . Jain: Indian Constitutional Law, Wadhwa, Fourth Edition, pp. 342-43.

                C. Other Grants The Constitution also
                provided for a third type of grants-in-a id,
                but for a temporary period. Thus, a provi-
                sion was made for . gra nts in lieu of export
                duties on jute and jute products to the States
                of Assam, Bihar, Orissa and West Bengal.
                These grants were to be given for a period
                of ten years from the commencement of the
                Constitution. These sums were charged on the
                Consolidated Fund of India and were made
                to the states on the recommendation of the
                Finance Commission.

        5. Goods and Services Tax Council
            The smooth and efficient administration of
            the goods and services tax (GST) requires a
            co-operation and co-ordination between the
            Centre and the States. In order to faci1itate
            this consultation process, the 101 st Amend-
            ment Act of 2016 provided for the establish-
            ment of a Goods and Services Tax Councilor
            the CST Council.

            Article 279-A empowered the President to
            constitute a GST Council by an order.  
                - Article 279-A(1) says that the President shall,
                within sixty days from the commencement
                of the Constitution (One Hundred and First
                Amendment) A ct, 2016, by order, constitute a
                Council to be called the Goods and Services Tax
                Council. 
            The Council is a jOint forum of the Centre and
            the States. It is required to make recommen-
            dations to the Centre and the States on the
            following matters:

                (a) The taxes, cesses and surcharges lev ied
                by the Centre, the States a nd the local
                bodies that would get merged in GST.
                
                (b) The goods a nd services that may be sub-
                jected to GST or exempted from GST.
                
                (c) Model GST Laws, principles ortevy, appor-
                tionment of GST lev ied on supplies in
                the course of inter-state trade or com-
                merce a nd the principles that govern
                the place of supply.

                (d) The threshold limit of turnover below
                which goods a nd serv ices may be
                exempted from GST.

                (e) The niles includ ing noar rates with bands
                of CST.

                (f) Any special rate or rates for a specified
                period to raise <ldd itional resources dur-
                ing a ny natural calamity o r disaster.

        6. Finance Commission
            Article 280 provides for a Finance Commis-
            sion as a quasi-judicia l body. It is constituted
            by the President every fifth yea r or even ear-
            li er. It is requ ired to make recommendations
            to the President o n the fo llowing matters:
                • The d istribut io n of the net proceeds of
                taxes to be sha red between the Cen tre
                a nd the states, a nd the a lloca ti o n
                between the states, the respect ive shares
                of such proceeds.
                • The principles which should govern the
                grants-i n-aid to the states by the Centre
                ( Le. , out of the Consolidated Fund of
                India).
                • The measures needed to a ugment the
                Co nsolidated fund of a sta te to supple-
                ment the resou rces of the panchayats
                a nd the Illunicipalities in the sta te o n
                the basis of the recommendat io ns made
                by the State Finance Comm ission .
                    - This function was added by the 73rd and 74th
                    Amendment Acts of 1992 which have granted
                    constilUliona l SlatllS on the panchayats and the
                    municipalities respectively.
                • Any other matte r referred to it by the
                Pres ide nt in the inte rests of sou nd
                fina nce.

            Till 1960, the COlll mission <l lso suggested
            the a mounts paid to the States of Assam, Bihar,
            Orissa and West Bengal in lieu of assignment
            of any share of the net proceeds in each year
            of export du ty on jute and jute products.

            The Constitu ti on e nvisages the Fi nance
            Co mm ission as the balancing wheel of fiscal
            fede ral is m in India.

        7. Protection of the States' Interest
            To protect the interest of states in the fi na n-
            cial matters, the Co nst itut ion lays down that
            the fo llowi ng bills CH n be introduced in the
            Parliament o nly on the recommendation of
            the Pres iden t:
                • A bill whi ch imposes o r varies any tax
                or duty in which stiHCS are in terested;
                • A bill whi ch var ies the mcaning of the
                express ion 'ag ri cultural income' as
                defined fo r the purposes of the enact-
                ments relat ing to Indian income t.."lx;
                • A bill wh ich affects the principles on
                wh ich moneys are or ma)' be distribut-
                abl e to states; a nd
                • A bill which imposes a ny surcharge on
                any specified tax or duty for the pu rpose
                of the Cen tre.

            The exp ression ~tax or duty in which states
            arc interested" mca ns: (a) a tax o r duty the
            whole or part of the net p roceeds whereof arc
            assigned to <l ny st'lle; or (b) a tax or duty by
            refere nce to the net proceeds whereof sum s
            are for the time bcing payable, out of the
            Co nsolidated fund of India to any state.

            The phrase 'net proceeds' means the pro-
            ceeds of a tax or a duty m in tiS the cost of col-
            lect io n. The net proceeds of a tax o r a duty
            in a n)' area is to be ascertai ned and cert ified
            by the Comptroller find Auditor-Ge nera l of
            India. His/ her ce rtificate is fi nal.

        8. Borrowing by the Centre and the States
            The Co nstitution makes the following provi-
            sio ns with rcgard to the borrowing powers o f
            (he Cen tre and the states:
                • The Central government can borrow either
                within India o r outside upon thesecu-
                ri tyoftheCol1solid.atcd fundofIndiaor can
                give guarantees, but both within the lim its
                fixed by the Parliament. So far, no such law
                has been enacted by the Parliament.

                • Simi la rl y. a st;:ltc government ca n bor-
                row with in India (and not abroad) upon
                the security of the Consolidated Fund of
                the State or cC:ln g ive gua rantees, but both
                within the limits fi xed by the legislature
                of that state. 

                • The Central government can make
                loans to a ny stilte or give gua rantees in
                respect of loans raised by any state. Any
                sums required for the purpose of makw
                ing such loans are to be charged on the
                Consolidated Fund of India.
                
                • A state cannot raise any loan without the
                consent of the Centre, if there is sti11 out-
                standing any part of a loan made to the
                state by the Centre or in respect of which
                a guarantee has been given by the Centre.

        9. Inter-Governmental Tax Immunities
            Like any other federa l Constitution, the
            Indian Constitution also contain the rule of
            'immunity from mutual taxation' and makes
            the following provisions in this regard:

                A. Exemption of Central Property from
                    State Taxation The property of Centre is
                    exempted from all taxes imposed by a state
                    or any auth0rity within a state like municiw
                    palities, district boards, panchayats and so on.
                    But, the Parliament is empowered to remove
                    this ban. The word 'property' includes lands,
                    buildings, chattels, shares, debts, everything
                    that has a money value, and every kind of
                    property-movable or immovable and tanw
                    gible or intangible. Further, the property may
                    be used for sovereign (like armed forces) or
                    commercial purposes.
                    The corporations or the companies created
                    by the Central government are not immune
                    from state taxation or local taxation. The
                    reason is that a corporation or a company is
                    a separate legal entity.

                B. Exemption of State Property or Income
                    from Central Taxation The property and
                    income of a state is exempted from Central
                    taxation. Such income may be derived from
                    sovereig'n functions or commercial functions.
                    But the Centre can tax the commercial opera-
                    tions of a state if Parliament so provides.
                    However, the Parliament can declare any
                    particular trade or business as incidental to
                    the ordinary functions of the government and
                    it would then not be taxable.

                    Notably, the property and income of local
                    authorities situated within a state are not
                    exempted from the Central taxation. Simi-
                    larly, the property or income of corporations
                    and companies owned by a state can be taxed
                    by the Centre.

                    The Supreme Court, in an advisory opin-
                    ion (1963) (In Re. Sea Customs Act, 1963), held that the immunity granted
                    to a state in respect of Central taxation does
                    not extend to the duties of customs or duties
                    of excise. In other words, the Centre can
                    impose customs duty on goods imported or
                    exported by a state, or an excise duty on goods
                    produced or manufactured by a state.

        10. Effects of Emergencies
            The Centre-state financial relations in norw
            mal times (described above) undergo changes
            during emergencies. These are as follows:
                A. National Emergency Vlhile the proclama-
                    tion of national emergency (under Article
                    352) is in operation, the President can modify
                    the constitutional distribution of revenues
                    between the Centre and the states. This means
                    that the President can either reduce or cancel
                    the transfer of finances (both tax sharing and
                    grants-in-aid) from the Centre to the states.
                    Such modification continues till the end of
                    the financial year in which the emergency
                    ceases to operate.
                    
                B. Financial Emergency While the proc-
                    lamation of financial emergency (under
                    Article 360) is in operation, the Centre can
                    give directions to the states: (i) to observe
                    the specified canons of financial propriety;
                    (ii) to reduce the salaries and allowances of
                    al1 class of persons serving in the state; and
                    (iii) to reserve all money bi11s and other
                    financial bills for the consideration of the
                    President.

    TRENDS IN CENTRE-STATE RELATIONS
        Till 1967, the centre-state relations by and
        large were smooth due to one-party rule
        at the Centre and in most of the states.
        In 1967 elect ion s, the Co ngress party was
        defeated in n in e states and its position
        at the Centre becam e weak . Thi s changed
        political scena rio he ralded a new era in the
        Ce n tre-state relation s. The no n-Congress
        Gove rnm e n ts in th e states o pposed the
        in creasing ce ntrali sat ion and in tervention
        of the Ce n t ral gove rnm ent. They raised
        the issue of state a utonom y a nd de ma nded
        m ore powers and finan cia l resources to the
        states. This caused ten sion s a nd co nfli cts in
        Centre- state relations.

        Tension Areas in Centre-State Relations
            The issues which created tensions and conflicts
            between the Centre and states are:
                (1) Mode o f appointme nt a nd di sm issa l of
                governor;

                (2) Discriminatory and pa rti san role of
                governors;

                (3) Imposi tion of Preside nt's Rule for p.a rti-
                san interests;

                (4) Deploy m e nt of Centra l forces in the
                states to mainta in law and order;

                (5) Reservation of sta te bills for the consid-
                eratio n of the Presiden t;

                (6) Discrim in ation in fina ncial allocations
                to the sta tes;

                (7) Role of Planning Commission in approv-
                ing state p rojects; (till its replacement
                by the NIT I Aayog in 2015);

                (8) Ma nageme nt of All-India Services ( lAS,
                IPS, and IFoS);

                (9) Use of e lectroni c media fo r politica l
                pu rposes;

                (10) Appointment of enquiry commi ssions
                against the chief mi n iste rs;

                (11) Sharing of fina nces (between Centre and
                states);

                (12) Encroach ment by the Centre on the
                State List;

                (13) Implem en tat ion of the Centrall y spon-
                sored schemes by the states; and

                (14) Modus operandi of the cen tral agencies
                like cm, ED and so o n.

        The issues in Cen tre-State relations have
        been under consideration since the mid 1960s.
        In this direction, the following develop ments
        have taken place:
            Administrative Reforms Commission
                The Ce ntral government appo inted i.I six-
                member First Ad min istrative Reforms Co m-
                mission (ARC) of India in 1966 under the
                chairma nship of Mora rji Desai (followed by
                K Hanumanthayya). Its terms of references
                included , a mong others, the examination of
                Centre-State relations. In order to exam ine
                tho roughly the va rious issues in Ce ntre-state
                relations, the ARC constituted a study tea m
                under M.C. Seta lvad. On the basis of the report
                of this study tea m, the ARC fina lised its own
                report and submitted it to the Central govern-
                ment in 1969. It made 22 recomm endations
                for improving the Centre-state relations. The
                important recommendations are:
                    • Establi sh ment of an Inter-Sta te Coun cil
                    under Article 263 of the Co nstitution.
                    • Appoin tme n t of persons havi n g long
                    experience in publi c life a nd ad m in-
                    istration and non-partisa n attitude as
                    governo rs.
                    • Delegation of powers to the maxim um
                    extent to the sca tes.
                    • Tra nsferring of more fina ncial resources
                    to the states to red uce their dependency
                    upon the Centre.
                    • Deployme nt of Ce n tral armed forces
                    in the scates either on their request or
                    othenvise.

                No action was taken by the CeIHral govern-
                ment o n the recomm endations of the ARC.

            Rajamannar Committee
                In 1969, the Tamil Nadu Government ( DMK)
                appointed a three-m ember committee unde r
                the chairmanship of Dr. P. V. Rajamannar to
                exa mine the e n tire question of Cen tre-state
                relatio ns and to suggest am endments to the
                Constitution so as to secure utmost auton omy
                to the states. The com mittee submitted its
                re port to the Tamil Nadu Government in 1971.
                    - The other two members or the committee were Dr.
                    Lakshmanswamy Mudaliar and P.C. Chandra Reddy

                The Committee identified the reasons
                for the prevailing unitary trends (tenden-
                cies of centralisation) in the country. - They
                include: (i) certain provisions in the Con-
                stitution which confer special powers on
                the Centre; (ii) one-party rule both at the
                Centre and in the states; (iii) inadequacy
                of states' fiscal resources and consequent
                dependence on the Centre for financia l
                assistance; and (iv) the institution of Cen-
                tral planning and the role of the Planning
                Commission.

                The important recommendations of the
                committee are as foHows: (i) An Inter-State
                Council should be set up immediately,
                -eii) Finance-Commission should be made a
                permanent body; (iii) Planning Commission
                should be disbanded and its place should be
                taken by a statutory body; (iv) Articles 356,
                357 and 365 (dealing with President's Rule)
                should be totally omitted; (v) The provision
                that the state ministry holds office during
                the pleasure of the governor should he omit·
                ted; (vi) Certain subjects of the Union List
                and the Concurrent List should be trans·
                ferred to the State List; (vii) the residuary
                powers should be a110cated to the states; and
                (viii) AIl·India services (lAS, IPS and IFoS)
                should be abolished.

                The Central government completely ignored
                the recommendations of the Rajamannar
                Committee.

            Anandpur Sahib Resolution
                In 1973, the Aka li Dal adopted a resolu·
                tion containing both political and religious
                demands in a meeting .held at 'Anandpur
                Sahib in Punjab. The resolution, gener·
                ally known as Anandpur Sahib Resolution,
                demanded that the Centre's jurisdiction
                should be restricted only to defence, foreign
                affairs, communications, and currency and
                the entire residuary powers should be vested
                in the states. It stated that the Constitution
                should be made federa l in the real sense and
                should ensure equal authority and representa·
                I tion to all the states at the Centre.

            West Bengal Memorandum
                In 1977, the West Bengal G~vernment (led by
                the Communists) published a memorandum
                on Centre-state. relations and sent it to the
                Central government. The memorandum inter
                alia suggested the following: (i) The word
                'union' in the Constitution should be replaced
                by the word 'federal'; (ii) The jurisdiction
                of the Centre should be confined to defence,
                foreign affairs, currency, communications
                and economic co·ordination; (iii) Al1 other
                subjects including the residuary should be
                vested in the states; (iv) Articles 356 and
                357 (President's Rule) and 360 (financial
                emergency) should be repealed; (v) State's
                consent should be made obligatory for forma·
                tion of new states or reorganisation ofexist·
                jng states; (vi) Of the total revenue raised
                by the Centre from all sources, 75 per cent
                should be allocated to the states; (vii) Rajya
                Sabha should have equal powers with that of
                the Lok Sabha; and (viii) There should be
                only Central and state services and the All·
                India Services should be abolished.
                The Central government did not accept the
                demands made in the memorandum.

            Sarkaria Commission
                In 1983, the Central government appointed a
                three·member Commission on Centre-state
                relations under the chairmanship of KS.
                Sarkaria, a retired judge of the Supreme Court.
                The commission was asked to examine and
                review the working of existing arrangements
                betw'een the Centre and states in all spheres and
                recommend appropriate changes and measures.
                It submitted it's report in 1988.
                    - R Sivaraman and S.R. Sen were hvo other members of the Commission.

                The Commission did not favour struc·
                tural changes and regarded the · existing
                constitutional arrangements and principles
                relating to the institutions basically sound.
                But, it emphasised on the need for changes
                in the functional or operational aspects. It
                observed that federalism is more a functional
                arrange ment for co-o perative actio n than
                a static institutional concept. It outrightly
                rejected the demand for curtailing the powers
                of the Ce ntre and stated that a strong Centre
                is essential to safeguard the nationa l unity
                and integrity which is bei ng threatened by
                the fi ssiparous tendencies in the body politic.
                However, it did not equate strong Cen tre with
                centralisation of powers. It observed that over-
                centralisation IC<l ds to blood pressure at the
                centre and anae mia at the periphery.

                The Commission made 247 recommenda-
                tions to improve Cen tre-state relations.
                The important recommendations are mentioned
                below:
                    1. A permanent Inter-State Counci l called
                    the Inter-Governmen ta l Counci l should
                    be set up under Article 263.

                    2. Article 356 ( President's Rule) should be
                    used very sparingly, in extreme cases
                    as a last resort when a ll the ava ilabl e
                    alterna tives fail.
                    
                    3. The in stitutio n of All-India Services
                    s hould be further st rengthened a nd
                    more of such services should be created.
                    
                    4 . The residuary powers of taxation should
                    continue to remain with the Parliament,
                    while the other residuary powers should
                    be placed in the Concurrent List.
                    
                    5. When the President withholds his/her
                    assent to th e state bills, the reasons
                    should be commu nicated to the state
                    government.
                    
                    6. Th e Nationa l Develop me nt Co un ci l
                    (NDC) should be renamed a nd recon-
                    stituted as the Na tional Economic a nd
                    Development Coun cil (NEDC).
                    
                    7. The zonal councils should be constituted
                    afresh and reactivated to promote the
                    spirit of federalism .
                    
                    8. The Centre should have powers to deploy
                    its a rmed forces, even without the co n-
                    sent of states. However, it is desi rable
                    that the states s hould be co nsul ted.
                    
                    9. The Centre should consult the states
                    before maki ng a law on a subject of the
                    Concurrent List.
                    
                    10. The procedure of consulting the chief
                    minister in the appo intment of the state
                    governo r shou ld be prescribed in the
                    Co nstitution itself.
                    
                    11. The net proceeds of the corpora tion tax
                    may be made permissibly shareable with
                    the states.
                    
                    12. The governor cannot dism iss the council
                    of ministers so long as it comma nds a
                    majo rity in the assembly.
                    
                    13. The governor's term of five years in a
                    sta te should not be disturbed except fo r
                    so me extre mely compelling reasons.
                    
                    14. No comm ission of enquiry shou ld be
                    set up aga inst a state minister unless a
                    demand is made by the Parliament.
                    
                    15. The surcharge on income tax should not
                    be levied by the Ce ntre except for a spe-
                    cific purpose and fo r a strictly limited
                    period.
                    
                    16. The present division offunctions between
                    the Finance Commission and the
                    Planning Co mmission is rea sonable
                    and should co ntinue.
                    
                    17. Steps should be taken to un iformly imple--
                    ment the three language formula in its
                    true spirit.
                    
                    18. No autonomy for radio and television but
                    decentralisation in their o perations.
                    
                    19. No cha nge in the role of Raj ya Sabha and
                    Cen tre's power to reorga nise the states.
                    
                    20 . The co mm issioner for linguistic mino ri-
                    ties should be activated.

                The Centra l government has implemented
                180 (out of 247) recom mendations of the
                Sarkaria Commission . The most important is
                the establishment of the Inter-State Council
                in 1990.

            Punchhi Commission
                The Seco nd commission on Cent re-State
                Re lations was set-up by the Govern ment of
                India in 2007 under the Chairma nship of
                Madan Mohan Punchhi, former Chief Justice
                of India. It was required to look into the
                issues of Centre-State relations keeping in view
                the sea-changes that have taken place in the
                polity and economy of India since the Sarkaria
                Commission had last looked at the issue of
                Centre-State relations over two decades ago.
                    - The other four Members of the Com mission were
                    Dhirendra Singh (Former Secretary to the Govern-
                    ment of India), Vinod Kumar Duggal (Former
                    Secretary to the Government of India), Prof. N.R.
                    Madhava Menon (Fonner Director, National Judicial
                    Academy, Bhopal and National Law School of India,
                    Bangalore) and Dr. Amaresh Bagchi (Emeritus
                    Professor, National Institute of Public Finance and
                    PoliCY,NewDelhi). With tbepassingawayofDr. Bagchi
                    in February 2008, Vijay Shanker (Former Director,
                    Central Bureau of Investigation, Government of
                    i ndia) was appointed in his place as a Member of the
                    Commission in October 2008

                The Comm ission submitted its report to the
                government in 2010. In finali sing the 1,456
                page report, in seven volumes, the Commis-
                sion took extensive he1p from the Sarkaria
                Commission report, the National Commission
                to Review the Working of the Constitution
                (NCRWC) report and the Second Administra-
                tive Reforms Commission report. However, in
                a number of areas, the Commission report
                uiffered from the Sarkaria Commission recom-
                mendations.

                After examining at length the issues raised
                in its Thrms of Reference and the related
                aspects in all their hues and shades, the
                Com mission cam e to the conclusion that
                'cooperative federalism' will be the key for
                sustaining India's unity, integrity and social
                and economic development in future. The
                principles of cooperative federalism thus may
                have to act as a practical guide for Indian pol-
                ity and governance.

                In all, the Commission made over 310
                recommendations, touching upon several sig-
                nificant areas in the working of Centre-state
                relations. The important recommendations
                are mentioned below:
                    1. To facilitate effective implementation of
                    the laws on List HI subjects, it is necessary
                    that some broad agreement is reached
                    between the Union and states before
                    introducing legislation in Parliament on
                    matters in the Concurrent List.
                    
                    2. The Union should be extremely restrained
                    in asserting Parliamentary supremacy
                    in matters assigned to the states. Greater
                    flexibility to states in relation to subjects
                    in the State List and "transferred items"
                    in the Concurrent List is the key for bet-
                    ter Centre-state relations.
                    
                    3. The Union should occupy only that many
                    of subjects in concurrent or overlapping
                    jurisdiction which are absolutely neces-
                    sary to achieve uniformity of policy in
                    demonstrable national interest.

                    4. There should be a co ntinuing auditing
                    role for the Inter-state Council in the
                    management of matters in concurrent
                    or overlapping jurisdiction.
                    
                    S. The period of six months prescribed in
                    Article 201 for State Legislature to act
                    when the bill is returned by the President
                    can be made applicable for the President
                    also to decide on assenting or withholding
                    assent to a state bill reserved for consider-
                    ation of the President.
                    
                    6. Parliament should make a law on the
                    subject of Entry 14 of List I (treaty
                    making and implementing it through
                    Parlia mentary legislation) to streamline
                    the procedures involved. The exercise of
                    the power obviously cannot be absolute
                    or unchartered in view of the federal
                    structure of legislative a nd executive
                    powers.
                    
                    7. Financial obligations and its implications
                    on state finan ces arising out of treaties
                    and agreements shou ld be a perma-
                    nent term of referen ce to the Fi nance
                    Com missions constituted from time to
                    time.
                    
                    8. While selecting Governors, the Central
                    Government should adopt the following
                    strict guidelines as recommended in the
                    Sarkaria Commission report and fon ow
                    its mandate in letter and spirit:
                        (i) He/she should be eminent in some
                        walk of life
                        (ii) He/ she should be a person from
                        outside the state
                        ( iii) He/ she should be a detached figure
                        and not too intimately connected
                        with the local politics of the state
                        (iv) He/ she should be a person who
                        has not taken too great a part in
                        politi cs generally a nd particula rl y
                        in the recent past

                    9. Governors should be given a fixed ten-
                    ure of five years and their rem ova l
                    should n ot be at the sweet will of the
                    Government at the Centre.

                    10. The procedure laid down for impeach-
                    men t of President, mutatis mutandis can
                    be made applicable for impeachmen t of
                    Governors as well.

                    11. Article 163 does not give the Gove rnor
                    a genera l discretionary power to act
                    again st or without the advice of his/ her
                    Council of Ministers. In fact, the arca
                    for the cxercise of discretion is limited
                    and even in this limited area, his/ her
                    choi ce of action should not be arbitrary
                    or fanciful. It must be a choi cc dicta ted
                    by rcason, activated by good fa ith and
                    tempered by caution.

                    12. In respect of bills passed by the Legis-
                    la tive Assembly of a state, the Governo r
                    should take the decision within six
                    m onth s whether to grant asse nt o r
                    to rese rve it for consideration of the
                    President.

                    13. On the question of Governor's role in
                    appointment of Chief Minister in the
                    case of an hung asse mbly, it is neces-
                    sary to lay dO\\Tn certa in clear guide-
                    lines to be followed as Constitutional
                    co nventions. These guidelines may be
                    as foll ows;
                        (i) The party or combi nation of parties
                        which co mmands the widest sup-
                        port in the Legislative Asscmbly
                        should be called upon to form the
                        Governm ent.
                        
                        (ii) If there is a p re-poll alliance or
                        coalition, it should be treated as one
                        political party and if such coalition
                        obtains a majority, the leader of
                        such coalition shall be called by the
                        Governor to form the Government.

                        (iii) In case no party or pre-poll coali-
                        tion has a clear m ajo rity, the
                        Govern or should select the Chief
                        Minister in the order of preference
                        indicated here.
                            (a) The group of parties which had
                            pre-poll alliance comma nding
                            the largest number

                            (b) The largest single party stak-
                            ing a cla im to form the gov-
                            e rnment with the su pport of
                            others

                            (c) A post-electoral coalition with an
                            partncrs joining the govcmment

                            (d) A post-electoral alliance with
                            some parties joining the gov-
                            ern ment and the remain ing
                            including independen ts sup-
                            porting the government from
                            outside

                    14. On the question of dismissal of a Chief
                    Mi n ister, the Governo r should invari-
                    abl y insist on the Chicf Minister prov-
                    ing his/ her majority o n the fl oo r of
                    the Hou se for whi ch he/ she s hould
                    prescribe a time limit.

                    15. The Governor should have thc right to
                    sanction for prosecution of a state min-
                    ister against the advice of the Council of
                    Ministers, if the Cabi net decision appears
                    to the Governor to be motivated by bias
                    in the face of overwhelming material.

                    16. The convention of Governors acting as
                    Chancellors of Universities and holding
                    other statutory positions should be done
                    away w ith. His/ her role should be confi ned
                    to the Constitutional provisions only.

                    17. When a n external aggression or internal
                    disturbance paralyses the state adminis-
                    tration creati ng a situation of a potential
                    break down of the Constitutional machin-
                    ery of the state, all alternative courses
                    available to the Union for discharging its
                    paramount responsibility under Article
                    355 should be exhausted to contain the
                    situation and the exercise of the power
                    unde r Article 356 should be Iimi tcd
                    strictly to rectifying a "failure of the
                    Constitutional machinery in thc state.

                    18. On the question of invoking Article 356 in
                    case of failure of Constitutional machin-
                    ery in states, suitable a mendments are
                    required to incorporate the guideli nes
                    set forth in the la ndmark judgemcnt.
                    of the Supreme Court in S.R. Bommai
                    case (S.R. Bommai vs. Union of India, 1994). 
                    This would remove pos-
                    sible misgivings in this regard on the
                    part of states and help in smoothening
                    Centre-state relations.

                    19. Given the strict parameters now set for
                    invoking the emergency provisions
                    under Articles 352 and 356 to be used
                    only as a measure of "last resore, and
                    the duty of the Union to protect states
                    under Article 355, it is necessary to pro-
                    vide a Constitutional or legal framework
                    to deal with situations which require
                    Central intervention but do not war-
                    rant invoking the extreme steps under
                    ArtiCles 352 and 356. Providing the
                    framework for ~loca1ised emergency"
                    would ensure that the state govern-
                    ment can contin3e to function and the
                    Assembly would not have to be dissolved
                    while providing a mechanism to let the
                    Central Government respond to the issue
                    specifically and locally. The imposition
                    of local emergency is fully justified
                    under the mandate of Article 355 read
                    with Entry 2A of List I and Entry 1 of
                    List n of the Seventh Schedule.

                    20. Suitable amendments to Article 263 are
                    required to make the Inter-State Council
                    a credible, powerful and fair mecha-
                    nism for management of inter-state and
                    Centre-state differences.

                    21. The Zonal Councils should meet at
                    least twice a year with an agenda pro-
                    posed by states concerned to maximise
                    co-ordination and promote harmonisa-
                    tion of policies and action having inter-
                    state ramification. The Secretariat of
                    a strengthened Inter-State Council can
                    function as the Secretariat of the Zonal
                    Councils as well.

                    22. The Empowered Committee of Finance
                    Ministers of States proved to be a suc-
                    cessful experiment in inter-state co-
                    ordination on fiscal matters. There is
                    need to institutionalise similar models
                    in other sectors as well. A forum of Chief
                    Ministers, Chaired by one of the Chief
                    Minister by rotation can be similarly
                    thought about particularly to co-ordinate
                    policies of sectors like energy, food, edu-
                    cation, environment and health.

                    23. Newall-India services in sectors like
                    health, education, engineering and judi-
                    ciary should be created.

                    24. Factors inhibiting the composition and
                    functioning of the Second Chamber as a
                    representative forum of states should be
                    removed or modified even if it requires
                    amendment of the Constitutional pro-
                    visions. In fact, Rajya Sabha offers
                    immense potential to negotiate accept-
                    able solutions to the friction points
                    which emerge between Centre and states
                    in fiscal, legislative and administrative
                    relations.

                    25. A balance of power between states inter
                    se is desirable and this is possible by
                    equality of representation in the Rajya
                    Sabha, This requires amendment of the
                    relevant provisions to give equality of
                    seats to states in the Rajya Sabha, irre-
                    spective of their population size,

                    26_ The scope of devolution of powers to
                    local bodies to act as institutions of self-
                    government should be constitutionally
                    defined through appropriate amendments.

                    27. All future Central legislations involving
                    states' involvement should provide for
                    cost sharing as in the case of the RTE
                    Act. Existing Central legislations where
                    the states are entrusted with the respon-
                    sibility of implementation should be
                    suitably amended providing for sharing
                    of costs by the Central Government,

                    28. The royalty rates on major minerals
                    should be revised at least every three
                    years without any delay. States should be
                    properly compensated for any delay in
                    the revision of royalty beyond three years.

                    29. The current ceiling on profession tax
                    should be completely done away with
                    by a Constitutional amendment.

                    30. The scope for raising more revenue from
                    the taxes mentioned in article 268 should
                    be examined afresh. This issue may
                    be either referred to the next Finance
                    Commission or a n expert com mittee be
                    appointed to look into the matter.

                    31. lb bri ng greater accou ntab il ity, all fi s-
                    cal legislations should provide fo r a n
                    an nual assessmen t by a n independent
                    body a nd th e repo rts of these bod-
                    ies should be la id in both Houses of
                    Pa rl iament/ state legislature.

                    32. Considerations specified in the Thrms
                    of Refere nce (To R) of t he f in ance
                    Com mi ssion should be even ha nded
                    as between the Centre and the states.
                    There should be an effective mechan ism
                    to involve the states in the fina lisation
                    of the lbR of the f ina nce Co mmissions.

                    33. The Central Governmen t should review all
                    the existing cesses a nd surcha rges with
                    a view to bri nging down their share in
                    the gross tax revenue.

                    34. Because of the close lin kages between
                    the plan and non-plan expenditure, a n
                    expert comm ittee may be appoi nted to
                    look in to the issue of distinction between
                    the pla n and non-plan expe nditure.

                    35. There should be much bettercoordi.nation
                    between the Fina nce Co mm ission a nd
                    the Pla nning Com mission. The synch ro-
                    nisation of the periods covered by the
                    Finance Commission and the Five-Year
                    Plan will considerably im prove such
                    coordi nation.

                    36. The Finance Commission division in the
                    Ministry of Fina nce shou ld be co nverted
                    into a full-fledged department, servi ng
                    as the pe rma ne nt secretariat for the
                    Fina nce Commissions.

                    37. The Plan ni ng Commi ssion has a crucial
                    role in the curren t situation. But its
                    role shou ld be that of coordination
                    rathe r tha t of mi cro ma naging sectora l
                    pl a ns of the Centra l m inistries and the
                    sta tes.

                    38. Steps should be taken for the setti ng up
                    of an Inter·Swte Trade a nd Co m merce
                    Commission under Article 307 read with
                    Entry 42 of List-I. This Com m ission
                    should be vested with both advisory a nd
                    executive roles wi th decision making
                    powers. As a Co nsti tutional body, the
                    decisions of the Com mission shoul d be
                    fi na l a nd binding on all states as well as
                    the Un ion of India. Any party aggrieved
                    with the decision of the Comm ission
                    may prefer a n appeal to the Supreme
                    Court.

                The recommendations contained in the
                Re port of the PU ll chh i Commiss io n have
                been co nsidered by the Sta nd ing Com m ittee
                of t he In ter-Sta te Cou ncil in its meet ings
                he ld in 2017 and 2018. The recom menda-
                tions of the Co m mission along with the rec·
                omme lldation s of the Sta nding Comm ittee
                thereon , have been ci rcu lated to the state
                governme nts for comments.
                    - Annual Report 2021-22, Ministry of Home Affairs,
                    Govern ment of India, p. 246.


------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 15. 1 Articles Related to Centre-State Legislative Relations at a Glance
ArtIcle No Subject Matter
245. Extent of laws made by Parliament and by the legislatures of states
246. Subject-maner of laws made by Parliament and by the legislatures of states
246A. Special provision with respect to goods and services tax
247. Power of Parliament to provide for the establishment of certain additional courts
248. Residuary powers of legislation
249. Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to a matter In the state list In the national Interest
250. Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to any matter in the state list if a Proclamation of
Emergency is in operation

251
Inconsistency between laws made by Par1iament under articles 249 and 250 encll~
legislatures of states
252. Power of Parliament to legislate for two or more states by consent and adoption of such legislation by
any other state
253. legislation for giving effect to internaUonal agreements
254. Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made by the legislatures of states
255. Requirements as to recommendations and previous sanctions to be regarded as matters of prOCedure
only
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 15.2 Articles Related to Centre-State Administrative Relations at a Glance
Article No Subject Matter
256.
Obligation of states and the Union
257.
Control of the Union over states in certain cases
257A.
Assistance to states by deployment of armed forces or other forces of the Union (Repealed)
258.
Power of the Union to confer powers, etc., on states In certain cases
258A.
[ 259.
260.
Power of the states to entrust functions to the Union
Armed Forces In states In Part B of the First Schedule (Repealed)
Jurisdiction of the Union in relation to territories outside India
261.
Public acts. records and judicial proceedings
262.
Adjudication of disputes relating to waters of Inter-state rivers or river valleys
263.
Provisions with respect to an Inter-state Council
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------


------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 15.3
Articles R elated to Centre-State Financial Relations at a Glance
Article No Subject Matter
268.
268A.
269.
269A.
270.
271.
272.
273.
[ 274.
275.
Distribution of Revenues between the Union and the States
,
Duties levied by the Union but collected and appropr~ted by the states
Service lax levied by the Union and collected and appropriated by the Union and the states (Repealed)
Taxes levied and collected by the Union but assigned to the states
levy and collection of goods and services tax In course of inter-slate trade or commerce
TaKes levied and distributed between the Union and the states
Surcharge on certain duties and taxes for purposes of the Union
Taxes which are levied and collected by the Union and may be distributed between the Union lind the
states (Repealed)
Grants in lieu of export duty on jute and jute products
Prior recommendation of the President required to bills affecting taxation In which states are Interested
Grants from the Union to certain states

276.
277.
278.
279.
279A.
280.
281
282,
283.
284.
285.
286.
287.
288.
289.
290.
290A.
291.
Taxes on professtons, trades, callings and employments
Savings
Agreement With states in Part B of the First Schedule with regard to certain financial matters
(Repealed)
Ca lculation of "net proceeds~. etc.
Goods and ServiCes Tax Council
Finance C ommls~ion
Recommendations of the Finance Commission
Miscellaneous Financial Provisions
1:xpenHttiJre defrayable by the Unron or a state out of ItS revenues
Custody. etc., of Consolidated Funds, Contingency Funds and moneys credited to the public accounts
Custody of suitors' deposItS and other moneys received by public servants and courts
Exemption of property of the Union from state taxation
Restrictions as to Imposition of tax on the sale or purcha
se of goOds
Exemption from taxes on electricity
Exemption from taxation by states In respect of water or
electricity in certain cases
Exemption of property and income of a state from Union
taxation
Adjustment In respect of cartalo expenses and pensions
Annual payment to certain Devaswom Funds
Privy purse sums of Rulers (Repealed)
I
Borrowing by the Government of India
,
. . 0;" , .
293. Borrowing by states
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------


CHAPTER 16: Inter-State Relations

    The successful functioning of the Indian
    federal system depends not only on
    the harmonious relations and close
    cooperation between the Centre and the states
    but also between the states inter se. Hence, the
    Constitution makes the following provisions
    with regard to jnt e r~state comity:
        1. Adjudication of inter-state water disputes.
        2. Coordination through inter-state councils.
        3. Mutual recognition of public acts, records
        and judicial proceedings.
        4. Freedom of inter-state trade, commerce
        and intercourse.
    In addition, the zonal councils have been
    established by the Parliament to promote
    inter-state cooperation and coordination (States Reorganisation Act, 1956).

    INTER-STATE WATER DISPUTES
        Article 262 of the Constitution provides for
        the adjudication of inter· state water disputes.
        It makes two provisions:
            (i) Parliament may by law provide for the
            adjudication of any dispute or com·
            plaint with respect to the use, distri·
            bution and control of waters of any
            inter·state river and river valley.

            (ii) Parliament may also provide that neither
            the Supreme Court nor any other court
            is to exercise jurisdiction in respect of
            any such dispute aT complaint.

        Under this provision, the Parliament has
        enacted two laws (the River Boards Act (1956)
        and the Inter.state River Water Disputes Act
        (1956)). The River Boards Act provides for the
        establishment of river boards for the regulation
        and development of inter·state river and river
        valleys. A river board is established by the
        Central government on the request of the state
        governments concerned to advise them.

        The Inter·State River Water Disputes Act
        empowers the Central government to set up
        an ad hoc tribunal for the adjudication of a
        dispute between two or more states in relation
        to the waters of an inter·state river or river
        valley. The decision of the tribunal would be
        final and binding on the parties to the dispute.
        Neither the Supreme Court nor any other
        court is to have jurisdiction in respect of any
        water dispute which may be referred to such
        a tribunal under this Act.

        So far, the Central government has set up
        several inter·state water dispute tribunals.
        The name of the tribunals, the years in which
        they were constituted and the states involved
        in the dispute are mentioned in Table 16.1.

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 16.1 Inter·5tate Water Dispute Tribunals 5et·up 50 Far
51. No. Name 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Set·up In States Involved
Krishna Water Disputes T~ r ib :. u : n ;: a :. '-.,. ' .... __ .,.; 1969
Godavari Water Disputes Tribunal 1969
Narmada Water Disputes Tribuna! 1969
Ravl and Beas Water Disputes Tribunal 1986
Cauvery Water Disputes Tribunal 1990
Krishna Water Disputes Trlbunal·1I 2004
Vansadhara Water Disputes Tribunal 2010
Mahadayl Water DISputes Tribunal 2010
Mahanadi Waler Disputes Tribunal 2018
Maharashtra, Karnataka and Andh ra Pradesh
Mahar8shtra. Karnatak8, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh and Odisha
Rajasthan, Gujarat. Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra
Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan
Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and puducherry --i
Maharashlra, Kamataka and Andhra Pradesh
Odisha and Andhra Pradesh
----
Goa. Kamateka and Maharashtra
Odisha and Chhattisgarh
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

    INTER-STATE COUNCILS
        Article 263 contemplates the establishment
        of an Inter-State Council to effect coordina-
        tion b etween the states and between Centre
        and states. Thus, the President can establish
        such a council if at any time it appears to
        him / her 'that the public interest would be
        served b y its establishment. He/she can
        define the nature of duties to be performed
        by such a council and its organisation and
        procedure.

        Even though the President is empowered
        to define the duties of an inter·state council,
        Article 263 specifies the duties that ca n be
        assign ed to it in the follow ing mann er:
            (a) enquiring into and advising upon dis-
            putes which may arise betwee n states;
            
            (b) investigating an d discussin g subjects in
            which the states or the Cen tre and the
            states have a common in terest; and
            
            (c) ma king recom m enda tio n s upo n a ny
            su ch subject/ a nd pa rti cula rl y fo r th e
            b etter co-o rdin ation o f p o l icy a nd
            action on it.

        "The council's function to enquire and advice
        upon inter-state disputes is complementa ry to
        the Supre me Court's jurisdiction under Article
        131 to decide a legal controversy between the
        governmen ts. The Council ca n deal with any
        controversy whether legal or n on-legal, b ut its
        fun ction is advisory un like that of the court
        which gives a binding decision."
            - M.P. Jain: Indian Constitutional Law, Wadhwa, Fourth Editio n, p. 382.

        Under the above provisions of Article 263,
        the Presiden t h as established the fo llowing
        councils to make recommendatio ns for the
        better coordin ati on of policy a nd action in
        the related subjects:
            • Cen tra l Cou ncil of Hea lth an d Fa m ily
            Welfare .

            • Central Council of Local Government
                - It was originally known as the Centra l Council of Local Self-Government (1954).
            
            • Four Reg ion al Councils fo r Sales lax
            fo r the No rthern, Eastern, W este rn and
            Southern Zon es.
                - The Central Council of Indian Medicine and the
                Ce ntral Council of Homoeopathy we re set up under
                the Acts of P arliament.

        Establishment of Inter-State Council The
        Sa rkar ia Co mmi ss io n on Centre-State
        Relations ( 1983- 88) made a strong case for
        the establishm en t of a perma n ent Inter-State
        Council under Article 263 ofthe Constitution.
        It reco mmended that in order to di fferen ti-
        ate the Inter-State Coun cil from othe r bod-
        ies established under the sam e Article 263,
        it m ust be cal led as the Inter-Governm ental
        Counci l. The Commission recommended that
        th e Council sh ould be cha rged with the du ties
        la id down in clauses (b) and (c) of Articl e
        263 (see above).

        In pursuan ce of the above recom mendations
        of the Sarkaria Commission, the Ja nata Dal
        Governmen t headed by V. P. Singh establish ed
        the In ter-State Council in 1990 (The Inter-State Counci l Order da ted May 28, I990).
        5 It consists of
        the followin g members:
            (i) Pr ime minister as the Ch a irman

            (ii) Ch ief m in isters of all the states
            
            (iii) Chief ministers of union territories hav-
            in g leg islative assemblies

            (iv) Administrators of union territories not
            having legislative assemblies

            (v) Governors of States under President's rule

            (vi) Six Central cabinet ministers, including
            the home minister, to be nominated by
            the Prime Minister.

        Five Ministers of Cabinet rank / Minister of
        State (independent charge) nominated by the
        Chairman of the Council (i.e., Prime Minister)
        are permanent invitees to the Council.

        The council is a recommendatory body on
        issues relating to inter-state, Centre-state and
        Centre-union territories relations. It aims
        at promoting coordination between them by
        examining, discussing and deliberating on
        such issues. Its duties, in detail, are as folloW's:
            • investigating and discussing such sub- ·
            jects in which the states or the centre
            have a common interest;
            • making recommendations upon any
            such subject for the better coordination
            of policy and action on it; and
            • deliberating upon such other matters of
            general interest to the states as may be
            referred to it by the chairman.

        The Council may meet at least thrice in a
        year. Its meetings are held in camera and all
        questions a re decided by consensus.

        There is also a Standing Committee of the
        Council. It was set up in 1996 for continuous
        , consultation and processing of matters for
        the consideration of the Council. It consists
        of th e following members:
            (i) Union Home Minister as the Chairman
            (ii) Five Union Cabinet Ministers
            (iii) Nine Chief Ministers
        The Council is assisted by a secretariat
        called the Inter-State Council Secretariat. This
        secretariat was set-up in 1991 and is headed by
        a secretary to the Government of India. Since
        2011 , it is also fu nctioning as the secretariat
        of the Zonal Councils.


    PUBLIC ACTS, RECORDS AND JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS
        Under the Constitution, the jurisdiction of
        each state is confined to its own territory.
        Hence, it is possible that the acts and records
        of one state may not be recognised in another
        state. 1b remove any such difficulty, the Con-
        stitution contains the "Full Faith and Credit"
        clause which lays down the following:
            (i) Full faith and credit is to be given
            throughout the territory of India to
            public acts, records and judicial proceed-
            ings of the Centre and every state. The
            expression 'public acts' includes both
            legislative and executive acts of the gov-
            ernment. The expression 'public record'
            includes any official book, register or
            record made by a public servant in the
            discharge of his/ her official duties.
        
            (ii) The manner in which and the conditions
            under which such acts, records and
            proceedings are to be proved and their
            effect determined would be as provided
            by the laws of Parliament. This means
            that the general rule mentioned above
            is subject to the power of Parliament to
            lay down the mode of proof as well as
            the effect of such acts, records and pro-
            ceedings of one state in another state.
            
            (iii) Final judgements a nd orders of civil
            courts in any part of India are capable
            .of execution anywhere within India
            (without the necessity of a fresh suit
            upon the judgement). The rule applies
            only to civil judgements a nd not to
            criminal judgements. In other words, it
            does not require the courts of a state to
            enforce the penal laws of another state.

    INTER-STATE TRADE AND COMMERCE
        Articles 301 to 307 in Part XIII of the Con-
        stitution deal with the trade, commerce and
        intercourse within the territory of India.

        Article 301 declares that trade, commerce
        and intercourse throughout the territory of
        India shall be free. The object of this provi-
        sion is to break down the border barriers
        between the states and to create one unit with
        a view to encourage the free flow of trade,
        commerce and intercourse in the country.
        The freedom under this provision is not
        confined to inter-state trade, commerce and
        intercourse but also extends to intra-state
        trade, commerce and intercourse. Thus, Arti-
        cle 301 will be violated whether restrictions
        arc imposed at the frontier of any state or at
        any prior or subsequent stage.

        The freedo m gua ra nteed by Article 301 is
        a freedo m from all restrictions, except those
        which a re provided for in the other provisions
        (Articles 302 to 305) of Part XIII of the Con-
        stitution itself. These are explained below:

            (i) Parliament ca n impose restrictions on
            the freedo.m of trade, com merce and
            intercourse between the states or within
            a state in public interest. But, the
            Parliament can not give preference to
            one state over anothe r or discriminate
            between the states except in the case of
            scarcity of goods in any part of India.
                - For example, the Parliament has madc the Essential
                Commodities Act (1955). This Act enables the
                Central governmcnt to contro l the production,
                sllpply and distribution of certain essential com-
                modities like petroleum, coa l, iron and steel and
                so on.
            
            (ii) The legislatu re of a state ca n impose
            reasonable restrictio ns on the freedom
            of trade, co mmerce and intercourse
            with that stale o r with in that state
            in public interest. But, a bill for this
            purpose ca n be introduced in the leg-
            isla ture on ly with the previous sanc-
            tion of the president. Further, th e state
            legislatu re cannot give preference to
            o ne sta te over a nothe r or disc rimi nate
            betwee n the states.

            (iii) The legislature of a state ca n impose
            on goods imported from other states or
            the union territories any tax to wh ich
            simi lar goods manufactured in that state
            arc subject. This provision prohibits the
            impositio n of discri mi natory taxes by
            the state.

            (iv) The freedo m (under Article 301) is sub-
            ject to the nationalisation laws ( i.e.,
            laws providing for monopoli es in favo ur
            of the Centre or the states). Thus, the
            Parliament or the state legislatu re ca n
            make laws for the carry ing o n by the
            respective government of any trade,
            busin ess, industry or service, whether
            to the exclusion, complete or partial, of
            citizen s or otherwise.

        The Parl iament can appoint a n a ppropri-
        ate authority fo r carryi ng ou t the purposes
        of the above provisions relating to the free-
        dom of trade, commerce a nd intercou rse and
        restrictions on it. The Parliament can also
        confer on that authority the necessary powers
        and duties. But, no such authority has been
        appoi n ted so far.
            - In USA, sllch authority is known as the ItHcr-5tate
            Commerce Commission.

    ZONAL COUNCILS
        The Zonal Cou ncils are the statutory (a nd
        not the consti tutional ) bodi es. T hey are
        esta blished by an Act of the Parliament, that
        is, States Reorganisatio n Act of 1956. The act
        di vided the country into five zones (Nort h-
        ern, Central, Eastern, Western and Southern)
        a nd provided a zonal cou nc il fo r each zone.

        Wh ile fo rming these zones, severa l fac-
        to rs have been taken into account wh ich
        include: the natural divisions of the country,
        the river systems and mC<-Ins of co mmuni ca-
        tion, the cultural and linguistic affinity and
        the requirements of econo mic developme nt,
        security a nd law a nd order.

        Each zona l council consists of the follow-
        ing members: (a) home minister of Central
        governmen t. (b) chief ministers of a ll the
        States in the zone. (c) Two other ministers
        from each stale in the zone. (d) Administra-
        tor of each union territory in the zolle.
        Besides, the following persons can be asso-
        ciated with the zona l cou nci l as advisors ( i.e. ,
        without the right to vote in the meetings):
            (i) a person nominated by the NITI Aayog;
            (ii) chief secreta ry of the govern ment of each
            state in the zone; and (iii) development com·
            missioner of each state in the zone.

        The home minister of Central government
        is the common chairman of the five zonal
        councils. Each chief minister acts as a vice-
        chairman of the council by rotation, holding
        office for a period of one year at a time.

        The zonal coun ci ls aim at promoting
        cooperation and coordination between states,
        union territories and the Centre. They dis-
        cuss and make recommendations regarding
        matters like economic and social planning,
        linguistic minorities, border disputes, intcr-
        state transport, and so on. They are only
        deliberative and advisory bodies.

        The objectives (or the functions) of the
        zonal councils, in detail, are as follows:
            • To achieve an emotional integration of
            the country.
            • To help in arresting the growth of acute
            state-consciousness, regionalism, lingu-
            ism and particularistic trends.
            • To help in removing the after-effects
            of separation in some cases so that
            the process of reorganisation, integra-
            tion and economic advancement may
            synchronise.
            • To enable the Centre and states to coop-
            erate with each other in social and eco-
            nomic matters and exchange ideas and
            experience in order to evolve uniform
            policies.
            • To cooperate with each other in the suc-
            cessful and speedy execution of major
            development projects.
            • To secure some kind of political equi-
            librium between different regions of the
            country.

        Nortth-Easte rn Council In addition to
        the above Zonal Councils, a North-Eastern
        Council was <;reated by a separate Act of
        Parliament-the North-Eastern Council
        Act of 1971.8 Its members include Assam,
        Manipur, Mizoram, Arunchal Pradesh,
        Nagaland, Meghalaya, Tripura and Sikkim (it came into existence on August 8,1972.).
        Its functions are similar to those of the
        zonal councils, but with few additions. It
        has to formulate a unified and coordinated
        regional plan covering matters of common
        importance. It has to review from time to
        time the measures taken by the member
        states for the maintenance of security and
        public order in the region.
            - In 2002, Sikkim was added as the eighth member or the North-Eastern Council

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 16.2 Zonal CounCils at a Glance
Name Members Headquarters
Northern Zonal Council
2. Central Zonal Council
3. Easlern Zonal Council
4. Western Zonal Council
5. Southern Zonal Council
Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab. Rajasthan, Delhi,
Chandlgarh, Jammu and Kashmir and ladakh
Uttar Pradesh. Uttarakhand, ChhaUisgarh. and Madhya
Pradesh
Bihar. Jharkhand. West Bengal and Odisha
Gujarat, Maharastra, Goa and Dadra and Nagar Haveli and
Daman and Diu
Andhra Pradesh. Telangana. Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Kerala
and Puducherry
New Deihl
Allahabad
Kolkata
Mumbal
Chennai
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 16.3 ArtIcle No Subject Matter
Articles Related to Inter-State R elations at a Glance
261 . 262. 263. 301 . 302. 303. 304. 30S. 306. 307. Mutual Recognition of Public Acts, etc.
PubliC acts. records and judtdai ploceedlngs
Disputes Relating to Waters
Adjudtcatlon of disputes relating to waters of Inter-stale rivers or river valleys
Co-ordination between States
Provisions with respect to an inter--state council
Inter·Stete Trade and Commerce
Freedom of trade, commerce and Intercourse
Power of Parliament to impose restrictions on trade, commerce and intercourse
Restrk:tIons on the leglslattve powers of the Union and of the states wtth regard to trade and commerce
Restrictions on trade, commerce and intercourse among states
Saving of exlS'llng laws and laws providing for state monopolies
Power of certain states in Part 8 of the First Schedule to impose restrictions on trade and commerce
(Repealed)
Appointment of autnortty for carrying out the purposes of Al1lcles 30110 304
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------


CHAPTER 17: Emergency Provisions

    The Emergency provisions are con-
    tained in Part XVIII of the Constitu-
    tion,' from Artic1es 352 to 360. These
    provisions enable the Central government to
    meet any abnormal situation effectively. The
    ratio,naIity behind the incorporation of these
    provisions in the Constitution is to safeguard
    the sovereignty, unity, integrity and security
    of the country. the democratic political sys-
    tem, and the Constitution.

    During an Emergency, the Central govern-
    ment becomes an powerful and the states go
    into the total control of the Centre. It converts
    the federal structure into a unitary one with-
    out a formal amendment of the Constitution.
    This kind of transformation of the political
    system fro~ federal during normal times to
    unitary during Emergency is a unique feature
    of the Indian Constitution. In this , context,
    Dr. B.R. Ambedkar observed in the Constitu-
    ent Assembly that:
        'All federal systems including American
        are placed in a tight mould of federal-
        ism . No matter what the circumstances,
        it cannot change its form and shape.
        It can never be unitary. On the other
        hand, the Constitution of India can be
        both unitary as well as federal accord-
        ing to the requirements of time and
        circumstances. In normal times, it is
        framed to work as a federal system. But
        in times of Emergency, it is so designed
        as to make it work as though it was a
        unitary system.'

    The Constitution stipulates three types of
    emergencies:
        1. An emergency due to war, external aggres-
        sion or armed rebellion (Article 352).
        This is popularly known as 'National
        Emergency'. However, the Constitution
        employs the expression 'proclamation
        of emergency' to denote an emergency
        of this type.
            - The phrase 'armed rebellion' was inserted by
            the 44th Amendment Act of 1978, replacing the
            original phrase 'internal disturbance'.

        2. An Emergency due to the failure of the
        constitutional machinery in the states
        (Article 356). This is popularly known
        as 'President's Rule'. It is also known
        by two other names-'State Emergency'
        or 'constitutional Emergency'. However,
        the Constitution does not use the word
        'emergency' for this situation.
        
        3. Financial Emergency due to a threat to
        the financia l stability or credit of India
        (Article 360).

    NATIONAL EMERGENCY
        Grounds of Declaration
            Under Article 352, the President can declare
            a National Emergency when the security of
            India or a part of it is threatened by war or
            external aggression or armed rebellion. It
            may be noted that the President can declare
            a National Emergency even before the actual
            occurrence of war or external aggression or
            armed rebeHion, if hel she is satisfied that
            there is an imminent danger.

            The P res ide nt ca l1 also issue di ffe re n t
            proclamations o n gro u nds o f wa r, exter na l
            aggression , armed rebellion , or im lllin en t
            dnn ger thereof, whether or not there is a
            proclamat ion al rea dy issued by him / h er
            and such procla m a tio n is in o pe ra tion. T h is
            provisio n was added by the 38th A mcmlmcnt
            Act of 1975.

            When a national emergen cy is decla red on
            the ground of 'wa r' or 'external aggression '
            it is known as 'External Emerge ncy'. On the
            other ha nd, when it is decla red on the ground
            of 'a rmed rebellion', it is known as 'Internal
            Emergen cy',

            A procla mation of National Emerge ncy may
            be applicable to the e nti re coun try o r onl y il
            part of it. The 42nd Am e ndment Act of 1976
            e nabled the Preside nt to limit the ope ration
            of a National Em ergen cy LO a specified pa rt
            of India.

            O rigin all y, th e Co n stitu tio n mentio ned
            'in ternal d isturbance' as the thi rd ground for
            the proclamatio n of a Nation al Emergen cy,
            but the expression was too vague an d had a
            wider conn otatio n. Hence, the 44th Ame nd-
            men t Act of 1978 substituted the words 'armed
            rebellion ' fo r 'internal disturbance'. Thus, it
            is no longer possible to decla re a Nationa l
            Emergency on the ground of 'in terna l d istur-
            bance' as was done in 1975 by the Co ng ress
            government headed by Indira Gandhi .

            T he Presid ent, howeve r, ca n proclaim
            a Nat io nal Em erge ncy onl y a fte r rece iv-
            in g a writte n recomm e ndatio n fro m th e
            cab inet. Thi s means th at the em ergen cy
            ca n be declared only on the concurre nce of
            the cabin et a nd not merely on the advice of
            the Prime Minister. In 1975, the then Prime
            Min iste r, Indi ra Gandhi advised the President
            to procl aim emergen cy without co nsul ting
            her cabinet. T he cabin et was informed of
            the procla matio n a fte r it was made, <IS a fa it
            accompli. The 44th A mendment Act of 1978
            introduced this sa feguard to eliminate any
            possib ility of thc Pri me Min ister alone tHk ing
            a decision in this rega rd .
                - Arl icl e 352 defi nes lhe te rm 'Cabinet' as the council
                co nsisting of the Prime Min ister and other mi nisters
                of the OJbi net rank.

            The 38th Amendmcnt Ac t of 1975 made the
            decla ratio n of a Nationa l e merge ncy immune
            fro m th e j udicial review. But, this provision
            was subsequen tl y deleted by the 44th Ame nd-
            me nt Act of 1978. Further, in the Minerva Mills
            case ( Minerva Mills vs Union of India, 1980) the Supreme Cou rt held that
            th e proclama tio n of a n <Hiona l emerge ncy
            can be cha llenged in a GOu rt on the ground
            of ma la fide or that the declara tio n waS based
            on wholly ex traneouS a nd irreleva nt facts or
            is absurd or perverse.

        Parliamentary Approval and Duration
            Th e p rocla ma tio n of Em ergen cy mu st be
            app roved by both the Houses of Pa rlia ment
            within on c mo nth fro m the date of its issue.
            Origi na ll y, the period a ll owed fo r a pprova l
            by the PHrii a men t was two mon ths, but was
            reduced by the 44th Ame ndment Act of 1978.
            However, if the proclam <lt ion of emcrgen cy
            is issued a t a time whe n the Lok Sabha has
            been dissolved or th e dissolu tio n of the Lok
            Sabha ta kes place dur ing the period of one
            mon th without approving the p rocla matio n ,
            the n the procla mation survives u ntil 30 days
            fro m th e first sitting of the Lo k Sabha afte r
            its reconsti tu tion , p rovided the R aj ya Sabha
            has in the l11 eanti me approved it.

            If approved by both the Houses of Pa r-
            lia m en t, the emerge ncy co ntinues for s ix
            months, and ca n be extended to <I n indefi n ite
            period with an Hpproval of the Pa rliame nt
            fo r every s ix m o nths. Thi s prov is io n fo r
            pe riodica l parliame nta ry approva l was also
            added by the 44th Amendme nt Ac t of 1978.
            Before that, the e mergency, once approved by
            the Parliam ent, co uld remai n in operat ion
            as lo ng as the Executi ve (cabi net) des ired.
            However, if the dissolutio n of the Lok Sabha
            ta kes place during (he per iod of six mo nths
            without approving the fu rt her co ntinu<lll ce of
            Em ergency, then the proclamat io n survivcs
            un til 30 days from the first s itt ing of the Lok
            SHbha afte r its reco nsti tutio n, p rov ided th e
            Rajya Sabha has in the mea n-time approved
            its continuation.

            Every resolution approving the procla ma-
            tion of emergency or its continuance must
            be passed by either House of Parliament by
            a special majority, that is, (a) a majority of
            the total membership of that house, and (b)
            a majority of not less than two-thirds of the
            members of that house present and voting.
            This special majority provision was intro-
            duced by the 44th Amendment Act of 1978.
            Previously, such resolution could be passed
            by a simple majority of the Parliament.

        Revocation of Proclamation
            A proclamation of emergency may be revoked
            by the President at a ny t ime by a subsequent
            proclamation. Such a proclamation does not
            require the pa rliamentary approval.

            Further, the President must revoke a proc-
            lamation if the Lok Sabha passes a resolution
            disapproving its continuation. Again , this
            safeguard was introduced by the 44th A mend-
            ment Act of 1978. B efore the amendment, a
            proclamation could be revoked by the Presi-
            dent on his/ he r own and the Lok Sabha had
            no control in this regard.

            The 44th Amendment Act of 1978 also
            provided that, where one-tenth of the total
            number of members of the Lok Sabha give
            a written notice to the Speaker (or to the
            President if the House is not in session) , a
            special sitting of the House should be held
            within 14 days for the purpose of considering
            a resolution disapproving the continuation of
            the proclamation.

            A resolution of disapproval is different
            from a resolution approving the continua-
            tion of a proclamation in the following two
            respects:

                1. The first one is required to be passed by
                the Lok Sabha only, while the second
                one needs to be passed by the both
                Houses of Parliament.
                2. The first one is to be adopted by a simple
                majority only, while the second one
                needs to be adopted by a special majority.

        Effects of National Emergency
            A proclamation of Emergen cy has drastic and
            wide ranging effects on the political syste m.
            Th ese consequences can be grouped into
            three categories:
                1. Effect on the Centre- state relations,

                2 . Effect on the life of the Lok Sabha and
                State assembly, and
                
                3. Effect on the Fundamental Rights.

            Effect on the Centre-State Relations While
            a proclamation of Emergency is in force, the
            normal fabric of the Centre- state relations
            undergoes a basic change. This can be studied
            under three heads, nam ely, executive, legisla-
            tive and financial.
                (a) Executive During a National Emergency,
                    the executive power of the Centre extends to
                    directing any state regarding the manner in
                    which its executive power is to be exercised. In
                    normal times, the Centre can give executive
                    directions to a state only on certain specified
                    matters. However, during a National Emer-
                    gency, the Centre becomes entitled to give
                    executive directions to a state on 'a ny' matter.
                    Thus, the state governments are brought under
                    the complete control of the Centre, though
                    they are not suspended.

                (b) Legislative During a National Emergency,
                    the Parlia ment becomes e mpowered to make
                    laws on any subject mentioned in the State
                    List. Although the legislative power of a state
                    legislature is not suspended, it becomes sub-
                    ject to the overriding power ofthe Parliament.
                    Thus, the nonnal distribution of the legisla-
                    tive powers between the Centre and states is
                    suspended, though the State Legislatures are
                    not suspended. In brief, the Constitution be-
                    comes unitary rather than federal.

                    The laws made by Pa rliament on the
                    state subjects during a Nationa l Emergency
                    become inoperative six months after th e
                    emergency has ceased to operate.

                    Notably, while a proclamation of national
                    emergency is in operation, the President can
                    issue ordinances on the state subjects also, if
                    the Parliament is not in session.

                    Furthe r, the Parl iamen t ca n confer pow-
                    ers a nd im pose duties upon th e Centre or its
                    officers and autho rities in res pect of matters
                    ou(side the Un ion List, in order to ca rry out
                    the laws made by it under its exte nded j uris-
                    diction as a result of the procla mation of a
                    Nat ional Emergency.

                    The 42 nd Amendment Act of J 976 provideci
                    that the two consequences men tioned above
                    (executive and legislati ve) extends 11 0t o nly to
                    a sta te where the Eme rge ncy is in operatio n
                    but a lso to a ny other state.

                (c) Financial While a proclamation of nation-
                    al emergency is in operation, the Presiden t
                    can mod ify the constitutional distribution of
                    reven ues between the cen tre and the states.
                    This means that the President ca n either
                    reduce or ca ncel the tra nsfer of fi nan ces
                    from Centre to the states. Such mociificatio n
                    continues till the end of the fi na ncial yea r in
                    which the Emergency ceases to operate. Also,
                    every such order of the Presiden t has to be laid
                    before both the Houses of Pa rl iament.

            Effect on the Life of the Lok Sabha and State
            Assembly While a proclamation of Nationa l
            Emergency is in operation , the li fe of the Lok
            Sabha may be extended beyond its norma l
            term (five years) by a law of Parliamen t for
            one year at a t ime (fo r a ny le ngth of time).
            However, th is extens io n can not con tinue
            beyond a period of six mon ths after the e mer-
            gency has ceased to opera te. Fo r exa mple, the
            term of the f jfth Lok Sabha (1971- 1977) was
            extended two t imes by o ne year at a ti me.
                - The term of the Fifth Lo k Sa bha which was to
                expire on 18 March, 1976 was extended by onc year
                upto 18 March, 1977 by the House of the People
                (Ex tension of Duration) Act, 1976. It was extend for
                a funhe r peri od of one year upto 18 March, 1978 by
                the House of the I'eo ple (Extension of Duration)
                Amendment Act, 1976. However, the I- louse was
                dissolved on 1 8 January, 1 977, " fter having been in
                existence for a period of five years, ten months a nd
                six days.

            Similarl y, the Pa rliament may extend the
            norma l tenure of a state legislat ive assembly
            (five years) by one )'ear each time (for a ny
            le ngth of time) during a national e mergency,
            su bject to a max im um period of six months
            after the Eme rge ncy has ceased to operate.

            Effect on the Fundamental Rights Articles
            358 a nd 359 describe the effect of a Nat io nal
            Em e rgency on the Fu nda mental Righ ts.
            Article 358 dea ls with the suspe nsion of the
            Fundamenta l Rights guara nteed by Article 19,
            while Article 359 deals with the slispension
            of other Funda mental Rights (except those
            gua'ra n teed by Articles 20 and 21). These two
            p rovisio ns are explained below:
                (a) Suspension of Fundamental Rights under
                    Article 19 According to Article 358, when a
                    procla mation of na tional emergency is made,
                    the six Fundamenta l Rights u nder Article 19
                    a re a uto matica ll y sllspe nded. No separa te
                    o rder fo r their suspe nsio n is required.
                    
                    While a proclamatio n of nat io na l emer·
                    geney is in operation, the state is freed fro m
                    the restr ictions imposed by Article 19. In
                    o ther words, the state ca n make any law
                    or ca n take any executive action abridgi ng
                    or taking away the six Fundame nta l Rights
                    guaran teed by Article 19. Any such law or
                    executive action can not be challenged on the
                    ground that they are inco nsisten t with the six
                    Funda men tal Rig hts guara nteed by Article 19.
                    When the Nationa l Emergency ceases to
                    o perate, Article 19 a uto matically revives
                    a nd comes into fo rce. Any law made du ring
                    Em ergency, to the ext ent of inconsiste ncy
                    with Article 19, ceases to have effect. However,
                    no remedy lies for anyth ing done during the
                    Emergency even after the Emergency expi res.
                    Th is mea ns that the legislative and executive
                    actions taken duri ng the e mergency ca n-
                    not be challenged even after the Emerge ncy
                    ceases to operate.

                    The 44th Amendment Act of 1978 restricted
                    the scope of Article 358 in two ways. Firstly,
                    the six Fu nda mental Righ ts under Article 19
                    stands suspended o nly when the Na tiona l
                    Emergency is declared o n the ground of war
                    or externa l aggression and not on the ground
                    of armed rebe lli o n . Seco nd ly, o nly those
                    laws which are related with the Emergency
                    are protected from being challenged and not
                    other laws. Also, the executive action taken
                    only under such a law is protected.

                (b) Suspension of other Fundamental Rights
                    Article 359 authorises the president to sus-
                    pend the right to move any court for the
                    enforcement of Fundamental Rights during a
                    National Emergency. This means that under
                    Article 359, the Fundamental Rights as such
                    are not suspended, but only their enforce-
                    ment. The said rights are theoretically alive
                    but the right to seek remedy is suspended.
                    The suspension of enforcement relates to
                    only those Fundamental Rights that are speci-
                    fied in the Presidential Order. Further, the
                    suspension could be for the period during
                    the operation of emergency or for a shorter
                    period as mentioned in the order, and the
                    suspension order may extend to the whole
                    or any part of the country. It should be laid
                    before each House of Parliament for approval.
                    While a Presidential Order is in force,
                    the State can make any law or can take any
                    executive action abridging or taking away the
                    specified Fundamental Rights. Any such law
                    or executive action cannot be challenged on
                    the ground that they are inconsistent with
                    the specified Fundamental Rights. When the
                    Order ceases to operate, any law so made, to
                    the extent of inconsistency with the specified
                    Fundamen· tal Rights, ceases to have effect. But
                    no remedy lies for anything done during the
                    operation of the order even after the order
                    ceases to operate. This means that the legis-
                    lative and executive actions taken during the
                    operation of the Order cannot be challenged
                    even after the Order expires.
                    The 44th Amendment Act of 1978 restricted
                    the scope of Article 359 in two ways. Firstly,
                    the President cannot suspend the right to
                    move the Court for the enforcement of funda-
                    mental rights guaranteed by Articles 20 and
                    21. In other words, the right to protection in
                    respect of conviction for offences (Article 20)
                    and the right to life and personal liberty
                    (Article 21) remain enforceable even during
                    emergency. Secondly, only those Jaws which
                    are related with the emergency are protected
                    from being challenged and not other laws and
                    the executive · action taken only under such a
                    law, is protected.

        Distinction Between Articles 358 and 359
            The differences between Articles 358 and 359
            can be summarised as follows:
                1. Article 358 is confined to Fundamental
                Rights under Article 19 only whereas
                Article 359 extends to all thos e
                Fundamental Rights whose enforcement
                is suspended by the Presidential Order.

                2. Article 358 automatically suspends the
                fundamental rights under Article 19 as
                soon as the emergency is declared. On
                the other hand, Article 359 does not
                au· tomatically suspend any Fundamental
                Right. It only empowers the president to
                suspend the enforcement of the speci-
                fied Fundamental Rights.
                
                3. Article 358 operates only in case of
                External Emergency (that is, when the
                emergency is declared on the grounds of
                war or external aggression) and not in the
                case of Internal Emergency (ie, when the
                Emergency is declared on the ground of
                armed rebellion). Article 359, on the other
                hand, operates in case of both External
                Emergency as well as Internal Emergency.
                
                4. Article 358 suspends Fundamental Rights
                under Article 19 for the entire duration
                of Emergency while Article 359 suspends
                the enforcement of Fundamental Rights
                for a period specified by the president
                which may either be the entire duration
                of Emergency or a shorter period.
                
                5. Article 358 extends to the entire country
                whereas Article 359 may extend to the
                entire country or a part of it.
                
                6. Article 358 suspends Article 19 com-
                pl etely while Article 359 does not
                empower the suspension of the enforce-
                ment of Articles 20 and 21.
                
                7. Article 358 enables the State to make any
                law or take any executive action incon-
                sistent with Fundamental Rights under
                Article 19 while Article 359 enables
                the Stil te to make Lln y law or take a ny
                executi ve ar.tion inconsiste nt with those
                Funclamcntal Rights whose enforcement
                is suspended by the Presidcntial Order.

            The re is a lso a similarity between Article
            358 and Art icle 359. Bot h provide immu nity
            frol11 ch all e ngc to o nl y those laws which arc
            re lated with t he Em e rgen cy and not othe r
            la ws. Also, th e execut ive a ct ion taken onl y
            unde r such c'l law is protected by both.

        Declarations Made So Far
            This type of Emerge ncy ha s been procla im ed
            three times so far-in 1962, 197 1 <l nci I975.
            The first proclama tion of National Eme r-
            gency was issued in October ]962 on account
            of Chinese aggression in the NEFA (North-East
            Frontier Agency -now Arunachal Pradesh) ,
            and was in force till J anuary 1968. He nce,
            a fresh procla mation was not needed at the
            time of Wilr against Pakista n in 1965.

            The seco nd proclamation of national eme r-
            ge ncy was made in Decembe r 197] in the
            wake of attilck by Pak istan. Even when this
            Emergency was in o pe ration , a third procla-
            ma tion of Nat ional Emergency was made in
            Jun e 1975. B oth the seco nd and th ird procla-
            mations were revo ked in i\'larch 1977.

            The first two proclamat ions (1962 a nd
            1971) were made on the grou nd of 'external
            aggression' , wh ile the th ird procla mation
            (1975) was made on the ground of 'i nternal
            disturbance ', that is, ce rtain persons ha ve
            been inciting the police a nd the armed forces
            aga inst the discharge of the ir duties and their
            normal function ing.

            The Emerge ncy declared in 1975 ( internal
            emergency) proved to be the most controver-
            sial. The re was widespread criticism of (he
            misuse of Emergency powers. In the elec-
            tions held to the Lok Sabha in 1977 after the
            Emergency, the Congress Party led by Indira
            Gandh i lost a nd the ,Ja l1ta Party came to
            power. This govern ment appointed the Shah
            Comm ission to investigate the circulllsta nces
            tha t wa rranted the dechlration of an Emer-
            gency in 1975. The co mmission did not jus-
            tify the declarat ion of the Em ergency. Hen ce,
            the 44th Amendme nt I\ct was enactcd in 1978
            to introdu ce a number of safeguards aga inst
            the misuse of Emerge ncy provisions.

    PRESIDENT'S RULE
        Grounds of Imposition
            Article 355 imposes a duty on the Centre to
            protect every state agai nst externa l aggression
            and internal disturbance and to ensu re that
            the govern me nt orevery state is ca rried on in
            acco rda nce with the prov isio ns ofthe Co nst i-
            tution. It is th is duty in the performance of
            wh ich the Centre takes over the govern ment
            of t.I state unde r Article 356 in case of fail ure
            of constitutional machin ery in state. This is
            popu la rly known as 'President's Rule'. It is
            also known as 'Slate Emergency' or 'Consti-
            tu tiona l Emergency'.

            The President's Ru le can be procla imed
            underArticle3560n two grounds-one men-
            tioned in Articl e 356 itself and another in
            Art icle 365:
                1. Articl e 356 e mpowers the President to
                issue a proclamation, if hel she is sat is-
                fied that a sittlqtion has arise n in which
                the government of a state ca nllot be
                carried on in accordance with the provi-
                sions of the Constitution . Notably, the
                President can act either on a report of
                the governor of the state or otherwise too
                (ie, even without the governor's report).

                2. Article 365 says that whenever a stale
                fails to comply with or to give effect to
                any direction fro m the Centre, it will
                be lawful for the President to hold that
                a situation has arisen in which the gov-
                ern me nt of the state can not be ca rried
                on in accordance with the provisions of
                the Constitution .

        Parliamentary Approval and Duration
            A procla mation imposing Presiden t's Rule
            must be approved by both the Houses of Par-
            lia me nt within twO months from the date
            of its issue. However, if the procla mation of
            President's Ru le is issued at a time when the
            Lok Sahha has been dissolved or the di sso lu ~
            tion of the Lok Sabha takes place during the
            period of two months without approving the
            proclamation, then the proclamation survives
            until 30 days from the first sitting of the Lok
            Sabha after its reconstitution, provided the
            Rajya Sabha approves it in the mean time.

            If approved by both the Houses of Parlia~
            ment, the President's Rule continues for six
            months. It can be extended for a maximum
            period of three years with the approval of
            the Parliament, every six months. However,
            if the dissolution of the Lok Sabha takes
            place during the period of six months with~
            out approving the further continuation of
            the President's Rule, then the proclamation
            survives until 30 days from the first sitting
            of the Lok Sabha after its reconstitution, pro-
            vided the Rajya Sabha has in the meantime
            approved its continuance.
                - The 42nd Amendment Act of 1976 had raised
                the period of six months to one year. Thus, once
                approved by both the Houses of Parliament, the
                proclamation of President's Rule could continue
                for one year. But, the 44th Amendment Act of 1978
                again reduced the period to six months.
                - The President's Rule imposed in May, 1987 in
                Punjab was allowed to continue for five years under
                the 68th Amendment Act of 1991.

            Every resolution approving the proc1amation
            of President's Rule or its continuation can be
            passed by either House of Parliament only by
            a simple majority, that is, a majority of the
            members of that House present and voting.
            The 44th Amendment Act of 1978 intro-
            duced a new provision to put restraint on the
            power of Parliament to extend a proclamation
            of President's Rule beyond one year. Thus,
            it provided that, beyond one year, the Presi-
            dent's Rule can be extended by six months at
            a time only when the following two condi-
            tions are fulfilled:
                1. A proclamation of National Emergency
                should be in operation in the whole of
                India, or in the whole or any part of the
                state; and

                2. The Election Commission must certify
                that the general elections to the legislative
                assembly ohhe concerned st.1.te cannot be
                held on account of difficulties.

            A proclamation of President's Rule may be
            revoked by the President at any time by a sub-
            sequent proclamation. Such a procla mation
            does not require the parliamentary approval.

        Consequences of President's Rule
            The President acquires the following extraor·
            dinary powers when the President's Rule is
            imposed in it state:
                1. He / she can take up the fu nctions of the
                sta te government and powers vested
                in the governor or any other executive
                authority in the state.

                2. He/ she ca n declare that the powers of the
                state legislature are to be exercised by
                the Parliament.
                
                3. He/ she can take all other necessary steps
                incl uding the suspension of the consti-
                tutional provisions relating to any body
                or authority in the state.

            Therefore, when the President's Rule is
            imposed in a state, the President dismisses the
            state council of ministers headed by the chief
            minister. The state governor, on behalf of the
            President, carries on the state administration
            with the help of the chief secretary of the state
            or the advisors appointed by the President.
            This is the reason why a proclamation under
            Article 356 is popular1y known as the imposi-
            tion of 'President's Rule' in a state. Further, the
            President either suspends or dissolves the state
            legislative assembly. The Parliament passes
            the state legislative bills and the state budget.
                - In case of dissolution, fresh elections are held for
                constituting a new legislative assembly in the state

            When the state legislature is thus sus·
            pended or dissolved:
                1. The Parliament can delegate the power to
                make laws for the state to the President
                or to any other authority specified by
                him/ her in this regard,

                2. The Parliament or in case of delegation,
                the President or any other specified
                authority can make laws conferring pow-
                ers and imposing duties on the Centre or
                its officers and authorities, and

                3. The President G in authorise, when the
                Lok Sabha is not in session, expenditure
                from the state consolidated fund pend·
                ing its sanction by the Pa rlia me nt.

            A law made by the Parliament or the Presi-
            dent or a ny other specified authority contin-
            ues to be o perative even after the Preside nt's
            Rule. This means tha t the period for wh ich
            such a law rema ins in fo rce is not cotermi-
            nous with the duration of the procla mation.
            But it ca n be repealed or a ltered or re-enacted
            by the state legislature.

            It should be noted here that the Preside nt
            ca nnot assum e to himself the powers vested
            in the conce rned state high court or suspend
            the provisions of the Const itution relating to
            it. In other words, the constitutional position ,
            status, powers a nd functions of the concerned
            state high court rema in th e same even during
            the President's Rule.

            A comparison of the National Emergency and
            the President's Rule (in terms of the grounds,
            parliamentary approval, duration, revocation
            a nd consequences) is given in Thble 17. 1.

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 17.1 Comparing National Emergency and President's Rule
National Emergency (Article 352) 1. It can be proclaimed only when the security of India
or a part of It Is threatened by war, external aggres-
sion or armed rebellion.
2. During its operation, the state executive and legis-
lature continue to functfon and exercise the powers
assigned to them under the Constitution. Its effect Is
that the Centre gets concurrent powers of administra-
tion and legislation In the state.
3. Under this, the Parliament ca n make laws on th e
subjects enumerated in the State list only by itself,
that is, it cannot delegate the same to any other body
or authority.
4. There is no maximum period prescribed for Its opera-
tion. It can be continued Indefinitely with the approval
of Parliament for every six months.
5. Under this, the relationship of the Centre with all the
states undergoes a modlflcation.
6. Every resolution of Parliament apprO\!lng its proclama-
tion or Its continuance must be passed by a special
maJority.
7. It affects fundamental rights of the citizens.
B. lok Sabha can pass a resolution for Its revocation.
Presldenfs Rule (Article 356)
1. It can be proclaimed when the government of a state
cannot be ca rried on in accordance with the provl·
sions of the Constitution due to reasons which may
not have any connection with war, external aggres-
sion or armed rebellion.
2. During its operation, the state executive Is dismissed
and the state legislature Is either suspended or dIs-
sorved. The president administers the state through
the governor and the Parliament makes laws for the
state. In bltef, the executive and legtslettve powers of
the state are assumed by the Centre.
3. Under this. the Parliament can delegate the power
to make laws for the stale to the President or to any
other authority specified by him/her. $0 far, the practice
has been for the president to make laws for the state
In consultation with the members of Parliament from
that state. Such laws are known as President's Acts.
4. There Is a maximum period prescribed for tts opere-
tion, that is, three years. Thereafter . It must come to
an end and the normal constitutional machinery must
be restored In the state.
5. Under this, the relationship of only the state under
emergency with the Centre undergoes a modification.
6. Every resolution of Parliament approving ItS prada-
matlon or Its continuance can be passed omy by a
simple maJority.
--
7. It has no effect on Fundamental Rights of the citizens.
8. There Is no such provision. It can be revoked by the
President only on his/her own.
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

        Use of Article 356
            Since 1950, the President's Rule has been
            imposed on more than 125 occasions. Further,
            on a number of occasions, the President's Rule
            has been imposed in an arbitrary manner for
            political or personal reasons. Hence, Article 356
            has become onc of the most controversial and
            most criticised provision of the COnstitution.

            For the first time, the President's Rule was
            imposed in Punjab in 1951. By now, all most
            all the states have been brought under the
            President's Rule, once or twice or more.

            When general elections were held to the Lok
            Sabha in 1977 after the internal emergency, the
            ruling Congress Party lost and the Janata Party
            came to power. The new government headed by
            Morarji Desai imposed President's Rule in nine
            states9 (where the Congress Party was in power)
            on the ground that the assemblies in those
            states no longer represented the wishes of the
            electorate. When the Congress Party returned.to
            power in 1980, it did the sa me in nine statesiO
            on the same ground.
                - Those nine States include Rajaslhan, Uttar Pradesh,
                Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh,
                Orissa, West Bengal and Haryana.
                - Those nine states include Uttar Pradesh, Bihar,
                Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Orissa,
                Gujarat, Maharashtra and Thmil Nadu.

            In 1992, President's Rule was imposed
            in three BJP-ruled states (Madhya Pradesh,
            Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan) by the
            Congress Party o n the ground that they were
            not implementing sincerely the ban imposed
            by the Centre on religious organisations. In
            a landmark judgement in the Bommai case (S.R. Bommai vs. Union of India, 1994), 
            the Supreme Court upheld the valid-
            ity of this procla mation on the ground that
            secularism is a 'basic feature' of the Constitu-
            tion. But, the court did not uphold the valid-
            ity of the impOS ition of the President's Rule
            in Nagaland in 1988, Karnataka in 1989 and
            Meghalaya in 1991.

            Dr. B.R Ambedkar, while replying to the crit-
            ics of this provision in the Constituent Assem-
            bly, hoped that the drastic power conferred by
            Article 356 would remain a 'dead-letter' and
            would be used only as a measure of last resort.
            He observed.
                "The intervention of the Centre must be
                deemed to be barred, because that would
                be an invasion on the sovereign author-
                ity of the province (state). That is a
                fundamental proposition which we must
                accept by reason of the fact that we have
                a Federal Constitution . That bei ng so, if
                the Centre is to interfere in the admin-
                istration of provi ncial affairs, it must be
                under som e obligation which the Con-
                stitution imposes upon the Centre. The
                proper thing we ought to expect is that
                such Articles will never be called into
                operation a nd that they would remain
                a dead-letter. If at all they are brought
                into operation , I h ope the President
                who is endowed with this power will
                take proper precautions before actually
                suspending the administration of the
                province."
                    - Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume IX, pp. 133 and 177.

            However, the subsequent events show that
            what was hoped to be a 'dead-letter' of the
            Constitution has turned to be a 'deadly-weapon'
            against a number of state governments and
            legislative assemblies. In this context, H .V.
            Kamath, a member of the Constituent Assem-
            bly commented: 'Dr. Ambedkar is dead and the
            Articles are very much alive'.

        Scope of Judicial Review
            The 38th Amendment Act of 1975 made the
            satisfaction of the President in invoking Arti-
            cle 356 final a nd conclusive which could not
            be challe nged in any court o n any ground.
            But, this provision was subsequently deleted
            by the 44th Amendment Act of 1978 implying
            that the satisfaction of the President is not
            beyond judicial review.

            In the Bommai case (1994) , the following
            propositio ns have bee n laid down by the
            Supreme Court on imposition of Preside nt's
            Rule in a state under Article 356:

                1. The presidential proclamation imposing
                Preside nt's Rule is subject to j udicia l
                review.

                2. The satisfaction of the President m ust be
                based on relevant materia l. The act ion
                of the preside nt ca n be struck down by
                the cou rt if it is based on irrelevant or
                extraneous grounds or if it was fou nd to
                be ma lafide or perve rse.
                
                3. Burden lies on the Cen tre to prove that
                releva nt mate ri al exist to j ustify the
                imposition of the President's Ru le.
                
                4. The court cannot go into the correctness
                of the material or its adequacy but it ca n
                see whether it is releva nt to the action .
                
                5. If the court holds the presidential proc-
                la ma ti on to be unconsti tutiona l and
                inva lid, it has power to restore the
                d ismissed state govern ment and rev ive
                the state legisla tive assembly if it was
                suspended or dissolved.
                
                6. The state legislative assembly should be
                dissolved only afte r the Pa rlia ment has
                approved the president ia l proclamation.
                Until such approval is given, the presi-
                de nt ca n only suspend the assembly. In
                case the Pa rliam ent fa ils to a pprove the
                proclamation, the assembly would get
                reactivated.
                
                7. Secularism is one of the 'basic featu res' of
                the Constitution. I-Ie nce, a state govern-
                ment pursuing anti-secular politics is
                liable to action under Article 356_
                
                8. The question of the state government
                losing the confidence of the legislative
                assembly should be decided on the fl oor
                of the House and until that is done the
                min istry should not be un sea ted.
                
                9. Where a new polit ica l party assumes
                power at the Centre, it will not have the
                a uthority to dismiss min istr ies formed
                by other parties in the sta tes_
                
                10. The power under Article 356 is an excep-
                tiona l power a nd should be used only
                occassiona lly to meet the requirements
                of special situations.

        Cases of Proper and Improper Use
            Based on the report of the Sa rkaria Com mission
            on Centre-state Relations (1988), the Supreme
            Cou rt in Bommai case (1994) enlisted the situa-
            tions where the exercise of power under Article
            356 could be proper or improper (Report of the Commission on center-state Relations Part I, pp. 165- 180 (1988).).

            Imposition of President's Ru le in a state
            would be proper in the following situations:
                1. Where after genera l elections to the
                asse mbly, no party secures a majority,
                tha t is,
                'Hung Asse mbly'.

                2. Where the party havi ng a majority in
                the assembly declines to form a ministry
                and the governor ca nnot find a coalition
                ministry commanding a majority in the
                assembly.
                
                3. \-\The re a ministry resigns after its defeat
                in the assembl y a nd no other pa rty is
                will ing or able to for m a ministry co m-
                ma nding a majori ty in the assembly.
                
                4. Where a constitutional direction of the
                Central govern ment is disrega rded by
                the sta te govern ment.
                
                5. Internal subversion where, fo r example,
                a governm e nt is de libera te ly act in g
                aga inst the Constitution a nd the law or
                is fome nting a violent revolt.
                
                6. Physical breakdown where the govern-
                ment wi lfully refuses to discha rge its
                constitutional obl igat ions endangering
                the security of the state.

            The imposition of President's Rule in a
            s~ate ~vo ul d be improper under the followi ng
            sltuatlOns:
                1. Where a ministry resigns or is dismissed
                on los ing majority su pport in th e
                assembly a nd the governor recommends
                impOSition of President's Ru le without
                probing the possibility of fo rm ing an
                alternative ministry.

                2. Whe re the governor makes his/ he r own
                assessme nt of the support of a m inis-
                try in the assembly a nd recommends
                impositio n of President's Rule without
                allowing the ministry to prove its major-
                ity on the fl oor of the Assembly.

                3. Where the ruling party enjoying majority
                support in the assembly has suffered a
                massive defeat in the general elections to
                the Lok Sabha such as in 1977 and 1980.
                
                4. Internal disturbances not amounting to
                internal subversion or physical breakdown.
                
                5. Maladministration in the state or allega-
                tions of corruption aga inst the minis-
                tryor stringent financial exigencies of
                the state.
                
                6. Where the state government is not given
                prior warning to rectify itself except
                in case of extreme urgency leading to
                disastrous consequences.
                Where the pmver is used to sort ou.t intra-
                party problems of the ruling party, or
                for a purpose extraneous or irrelevant to
                the one for which it has been conferred
                by the Con stitution .

    FINANCIAL EMERGENCY
        Grounds of Declaration
            Article 360 empowers the President to pro-
            claim ' a Financial Emergency if hel she is
            satisfied that a situation has arisen due to
            which the financial stability or credit of India
            or any part of its territory is threatened.
            
            The 38th Amendment Act of 1975 made
            the satisfaction of the President in declaring
            a Financial Emergency fi nal a nd conclusive
            and not questionable in any court on any
            ground. But, this proviSion was subsequently
            deleted by the 44th Amendment Act of 1978
            implying that the satisfaction of the President
            is not beyond judicial review.

        Parliamentary Approval and Duration
            A proclamation dec1aring financial emer-
            gency must be approved by both the Houses
            of Parliament within two months from the
            date of its issue. However. if the proclamation
            of Financial Emergency is issued at a time
            when the Lok Sabha has been dissolved or the
            dissolution of the lok Sabha takes place during
            the period of two months without approving
            the proclamation, then the proclamation sur-
            vives until 30 days from the first sitting of the
            10k Sabha after its reconstitution, provided the
            Rajya Sabha has in the meantime approved it.

            Once approved by both the Houses of Par-
            liament, the Financial Emergency continues
            indefinitely till it is revoked. This implies two
            things:

                1. there is no maximum period prescribed
                for its operation j and
            
                2. repeated par1iamenta~y approval is not
                required for its continuation .
            A resolution approving the proclamation of
            financial emergency. can be passed by either
            House of Parliament only by a simple major-
            ity, that is, a majority of the members of that
            house present and voting.
            A proclamation of Financial Emergency
            may be revoked by the president at anytime
            by a subsequent proclamation. Such a proc-
            la mation does not require the parliamentary
            approvaL

        Effects of Financial Emergency
            The consequences of the proclamation of a
            Financial Emergency are as follows:
                1. The executive authority of the Centre
                extends to the giving of (a) directions to
                any state to observe the canons of finan-
                cial proprietYj and (b) such other direc-
                tions to any state as the President may
                deem necessary,

                2. Any such direction may include a provi-
                sion requiri ng (a) the reduction of sal a-
                ries and a110wances of all or any class of
                persons serving in the statej and (b) the
                reservation of all money bills or other
                financial bills for the con sideration of
                the President after they are passed by
                the legislature of the state.
                
                3. The President may issue directions for the
                reduction of salaries and allowances of
                (a) all or any class of persons serving
                the Union; and (b) the judges of the
                Supreme Court and the high court.

            Thus, during the operation of a financial
            emergency, the Ce ntre acquires full co ntrol
            over the states in financial matters. H.N. Kun·
            zru, a member of the Constituen t Assembl y,
            stated that the fina ncia l e mergency provi·
            sions pose a serious threat to the financia l
            a utonomy of the states. Explai ning the rea·
            sons for their inclusion in the Constitution,
            Dr. B.R. Ambedkar observed in the Constitu·
            en t Assembly:
                "Th is Article more or less fo llows the
                pa tte rn of what is called the National
                Recovery Act of the United Sta tes passed
                in 1933, wh ich gave the pres ident power
                to make simi lar provisions in order to
                remove the difficulties, both economi·
                ca l and financ ial, that had overtaken
                the America n peopl e, as a resuil of the
                Great Depression."
                    - Constituent Assesbly Debates, Volume X, pp.361 -372.
            No Fina ncial Emergency has been declared so
            far, though there was a financial crisis in 1991.

    CRITICISM OF THE EMERGENCY PROVISIONS
        Some members of' the Constituent Assembly
        criticised the incorporation of e me rge ncy
        provi sions in the Con stitution 011 the fo llow·
        ing grounds:
            1. 'The fedeml character of the Constitution
            will be destroyed and the Union will
            become al l powerful.

            2. T he powers of the State -both the Union
            and the units- wi1J entirely be can·
            ce ntrated in the hands of the Union
            executive.

            3. The President will become a dictator.
            
            4. The financial autonomy of the state will
            be nullified.
            
            5. Fundamental rights will become mea n·
            ingless and, as a result, the democratic
            foundation s of the Co nstitu tion will be
            destroyed.'

        Thus, H.V. K a rn a th observed: 'I fear that
        by this single chapter we are seeking to lay
        the foundation ofa tota litaria n sla.te, a police
        sta te, a state completely opposed to all the
        ideals and principles that we have he ld aloft
        during the last few decades, a State where the
        rights and liberties of mill ions of innocent
        men and women will be in cOl1tinuolls jeop-
        ardy, a State where if there be peace, it wi ll
        be the peace of the grave and the vo idof the
        desert. It will be a day of shame a nd so rrow
        when the President makes usc of these powers
        having no parallel in a ny Co nstitution of the
        democratic countries of the world.

        K.T. Shah described them as: 'A cha pte r of
        reaction and retrogress ion. I find one cannot
        but nqtice two distinct currents of though':
        underlying a nd influe ncing throughout the
        prov isions of this chapter: (a) to arm the
        Centre with specia l powers aga inst the units
        a nd (b) to arm the government aga inst the
        people'.

        T.T. Krishnamachari feared that 'by means
        of these provisions the President <:Ind the
        Executive would be exercis ing a form of con-
        sti tutional dictatorship.

        H.N. Kunzru opined that 'the emergency
        financial provisions pose a se'rious threat to
        the finan c ia l autonomy of the States.'
        However, there were a lso protagonists of
        the emergency provisions in the Constituen.t
        Asse mbly. Thu s, Sir Alladi Krishn,aswami
        Ayyar labelled them as 'the very life·breath
        of the Constitution '. Mahabir lYagi op ined
        that they wou ld work as a 'safety·valve' and
        the reby help in the maintena llce of the C on ~
        stitution.
        
        While defending the emergency provisions
        in the Constituent Assembly, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar
        also accepted the possibility of their misuse. He
        observed, ' I do nor altogether deny that there
        is a possibi li ty of the Articles being abused or
        employed for political purposes.

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
T able 17.2 Articles Related to Emergency Provisions at a Glance
--. .. , "......._-
Effect of Proclamatfon of Emergency
Provisions in case of failure of constitutional machinery in states
---
-
~'-' ,
Exercise of legislative powers under proclamation issued under Article 356
~--
359A. 360. . Application of this part to the state of Punjab (Repealed)
Provisions as to Financial Emergency
..-.-.
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------


CHAPTER 18: PRESIDENT

    Articles 52 to 78 in Part V of the Consti-
    The Union executive consists of the
    Preside n t, th e Vice-President, the Prime
    Min ister, the council of m in isters and the
    attorney general of India.

    T he President is the head of the Indian
    State. He/ she is the first ci tizen of India and
    acts as the symbol of unity, integrity and
    so lidarity of the nation.

    ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT
        The President is elected not directly by the
        people hut by members of electora l college
        consisti ng of:
        1. the elected members of both the I- louses
        of Parl iament; ·

        2. the elected members of the legislative
        assemblies of the states; and
        
        3. the elected members of the legislative
        assemblies of the Un ion Thrritories of
        Delhi a nd Puducherry.
            - Th is provision was added by the 70th Constitutional
            Amendment Act of 1992 with effect from June I, 1995.

        Thus, the nom inated members of both
        the Houses of Parliamen t, the nominated
        me mbers of the state legislative assemblies,
        ITh is provision was added by the 70th Constitutional
        Amendment Act of 1992 with effect from June I, 1995.
        the members (both elected and nominated)
        of the sta te legislative councils (in case of
        the bicameral legislature) and the nominated
        members of the Legislative Assemblies of
        Delh i a nd Puducherry do not participate in
        the election of the President.

        The 104th Co nstitutional Amendment Act
        of 2019 has not extended further the nomi·
        nation of Anglo·lndian m embers to the Lok
        Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies. In
        other words, the am endment discontinued
        the provision of special representation of the
        Anglo·lndian community in the Lok Sabha
        and Sta te Legislative Assemblies by nomina·
        tion. Consequently, this provision ceased to
        have effect on the 25th January 2020.

        Further, where a n assembly is di ssolved,
        the members cease to be qualified to vote
        in the presidential elect ion , even if fresh
        elections to th e dissolved assembly are not
        held before the preSidentia l election.

        The Constitution provides that there shall
        be u niformity in the scale of representation of
        d ifferent states as well as parity between the
        states as a whole and the Union at the election
        of the President. 'Ib achieve this, the n umber
        of votes wh ich each elected member of the
        legislative assembly of each sta te and the
        Parliament is entitled to cast at such election
        sha1l be determined in the following manner:
            1. Every elected member of the legislative
                assembly of a state shall have as many
                votes as there are multiples of one thou-
                sand in the quotient obtained by divid-
                ing the population of the state by the
                total number of the elected members of
                the assemblyz. This can be expressed as:
                    Value of the vote of an MLA = Total population of state / Total n umber of electedmembers in the state legislative assembly x 1/1000

                According to the 84th Constitutional Amendment
                Act of 2001, the expression 'population' means the
                population as ascertained at the 1971 census, until the
                relevant figures for the first census taken after 2026
                have been published.
            
            2. Every elected member of either House
                of Parliament shall have such number
                of votes as may be obtained by dividing
                the total number of votes assigned to
                members of the legislative assemblies
                of the states by the total number of the
                elected members of both the Houses of
                Parliament. This can be expressed as:
                    Value of the vote of an MP = Total value of votes of all MLAs of all states / Total number of elected members of Parliament

        An illustration of the value of votes of
        each Member of the Legislative Assemblies
        of the states, total value of votes of each of
        the states, the value of votes of each Member
        of Parliament, the total value of votes of the
        Members of Parliament and the grand total
        of value of all the members in the electoral
        college for the presidential election, 2022 is
        given in Thble 18.4.

        The President's election is held in accordance
        with the system ofproportionai representation
        by means of the single transferable vote and the
        voting is by secret ballot. This system ensures
        that the successful candidate is returned by
        the absolute majority of votes. A candidate,
        in order to be declared elected to the office of
        President, must secure a fixed quota of votes.
        The quota of votes is determined by dividing
        the total number of valid votes polled by the
        number of candidates to be elected (here only
        one candidate is to be elected as President)
        plus one and adding one to the quotient. The
        formula can be expressed as:
            Electoral quota = Total number of valid votes polled / (1 + 1 = 2) + 1
            
        Each member of the electoral college is
        given only one ballot paper. The voter, while
        casting his/ her vote, is required to indicate
        his/her preferences by marking I , 2, 3, 4, etc.
        against the names of candidates. This means
        that the voter can indicate as many prefer·
        ences as there are candidates in the fray.

        In the first phase, the first preference votes
        are counted. In case, a candidate secures
        the required quota in this phase, he/she is
        declared eJected. Otherwise, the process of
        transfer of votes is set in motion. The ballots
        of the candidate securing the least number of
        first preference votes are cancelled and his/
        her second preference votes are transferred
        to the first preference votes of other candi·
        dates. This process continues till a candidate
        secures the required quota.

        All doubts and disputes in connection with
        election of the President are enquired into and
        decided by the Supreme Court whose decision
        is final. The election of a person as President
        cannot be challenged on the ground that the
        electoral college was incomplete (ie, exist-
        ence of any vacancy among the members of
        electoral college). If the election of a person
        as President is declared void by the Supreme
        Court, acts done by him/ her before the date of
        such declaration of the Supreme Court are not
        invalidated and continue to remain in force.

        Some members of the Constituent Assem.
        bly criticised the system of indirect election
        for the President as undemocratic and pro-
        posed the idea of direct election. However,
        the Co nst itutio n make rs chose the ind irect
        election due to the fo llowing reasons:

            1. The ind irect election o f the Pres ide n t
            is in ha rm o ny with the pa rliame nta ry
            syste m of govern me nt e n visaged in
            the Constitution . Under th is system , the
            Pres ide nt is on ly a no mi nal execu-
            ti ve a nd the rea l powers arc vested in
            the counc il of m inisters headed by the
            Prime Mini ster. It would have been
            a no malous to havc the President elccted
            d irectl y by the people a nd not give
            hi m/ he r any real powe r.

            2. The direct election of the President wo uld
            have been very costly and t im e a nd
            energy-co nsu ming due to the vast size
            of the e lectora te. Th is is u nwa rran ted
            keep ing in view that he/ she is only a
            symbo lic head.

        Some members of the Constituent Assembl y
        suggested that the President should be elected
        by the me mbers of the two 1 ·louses of Parlia-
        ment a lone. The ma kers of the Co nstitut ion
        d id not prefer th is as the Pa rliam ent, domi-
        mlted by o ne politica l pa rt y, would have
        invariably chosen a ca nd ida te fro m that pa rty
        and slI ch a Presiden t could not represent the
        states of the India n Un ion . The prese nt system
        makes the President a representati ve of the
        Un ion a nd the Slates equa lly.

        furt her, it was po in ted out in the Co n-
        stituen l Assembly th <lt the exp ression 'p ro-
        po rt io ne d re p rese n tat ion ' in th e case of
        presiden tial electi o n is a m isnomer. Propo r-
        t io nal re presentation takes place where two
        or more sca ts a re to be fi ll ed. In case of the
        Prcsidc n t, the vacan cy is o nly o n c. It co uld
        better be Gll1ed < I preferent ia l o r a lter nat ive
        vote syste m. Simil a rly, the ex press io n 'si ngle
        transfera ble vote' was a lso objected o n the
        grou nd tha t no voter has a single vote; every
        vote r has pl ura l votes.

        T he various pres ide ntia l electio ns he ld so
        far arc summarised in 'Tll ble J8. 1 .

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 18. 1 Elections of the Presidents (1 952-till now)
51 No. Election Victorious Candidate No. of Votes Main Rival Candidate No. of Votes
Year Secured (%) Secured (of,)
1. 1952 Dr. Rajendra Prasad 507400 (83.81) K.T. Shah 92827 (15.3)
2. 1957 Dr. Rajendra Prasad 459698 (99.35) N.N.Das 2000 (004)
3. 1962 Dr. S. Radhakrishnan 553067 (98.24) Ch. Hari Ram 6341 (1 . 1 )
•
4. 1967 Dr. Zakir Hussain 471244 (56.23) K. Subba Rao 363971(43.4)
5. 1 969 V.v. Giri 420077 (50.22) N. Sanjeeva Reddy 405427 (48.5)
6. 1 974 Fakhruddin AU Ahmed 756587 (80.18) Trldev Chaudhurl 1891 86 (19.8)
7. 1 977 N. Sanjeeva Reddy Unopposed
8. 1982 Giani ZaB Singh 75411 3 (72.73) H.R. Khanna 282685 (27.6)
9. 1 987 R. Venkataraman 740148 (72.29) V. Krishna Ayyer 281550 (27.1)
10. 1992 Dr. Shankar Dayal Sharma 675564 (65.86) George Swell 346485 (33.21)
11. 1 997 K.R. Narayanan 956290 (94 97) TN. Sheshan 50431(5.07)
12. 20'02 Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam 922844 (89.58) Laxmi Sehgal 1 07366 (10.42)
13. 2007 Ms. Pratibha PatH 638116 (65.82) B.S. Shekhawat 331306 (34.17)
14. 2012 Pranab Mukherjee 713763 (68.12) P.A. Sangma 315987 (30.15)
15. 2017 Ram Nath Kovind 702044 (65.65) Meira Kumar 367314 (34.35)
16. 2022 Droupadi Murmu 676803 (64.03) Yashwant Sinha 3801 77 (35.97)
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

    QUALIFICATIONS, OATH AND CONDITIONS
        Qualifications for Election as President
            A person to be eligible for election as Presi-
            dent should fulfil the fonowing qualifications:
                1. He/she should be a citizen of India.
                2. He/she should have completed 35 years
                of age.
                3. He/ she should be qualified for election
                as a member of the Lok Sabha.
                4. He/she should not hold any office of
                profit under the Union government
                or any state government or any local
                authority or any other public authority.
                A sitting President or Vice-President of
                the Union, the Governor of any state and
                a minister of the Union or any state is
                not deemed to hold any office of profit
                and hence qualified as a presidential
                candidate.
                    - The presidential and vice-presidential Elections
                    Act of 1952, as amended in 1997

            Further, the nomination of a candidate for
            election to the office of President must be
            subscribed by at least 50 electors as proposers
            and 50 electors as seconders. Every candidate
            has to make a security deposit of n5,OOO
            in the Reserve Bank of India. The security
            deposit is Hable to be forfeited in case the
            candidate fails to secure one-sixth of the votes
            polled. Before 1997, number of proposers
            and seconders was ten each and the amount
            of security deposit was f2 ,500. In 1997, they
            were increased to discourage the non-serious
            candidates

        Oath or Affirmation by the President
            Before entering upon his/ her office, the Presi·
            dent has to make and subscribe to an oath or
            affirmation. In his/ her oath, the President
            swears:
                1. to faithfully execute the office;
                
                2. to preserve, protect and defend the
                Constitution and the law; and
                
                3. to devote himself to the service and well-
                being of the people of India.

            The oath of office to the President is
            administered by the Chief Justice of India
            and in his/ her absence, the seniormostjudge
            of the Supreme Court available.

            Any other person acting as President or dis-
            charging the functions of the President also
            undertakes the similar oath or affirmation.

        Conditions of President's Office
            The Constitution lays down the following
            conditions of the President's office:
                1. He/she should not be a member of either
                House of Parliament or a House of the
                state legislature. If any such person is
                elected as President, he/she is deemed to
                have vacated his/her seat in that House
                on the date on which he/she enters upon
                his/ her office as President.
                
                2. He/she should not hold any other office
                of profit.

                3. He/she is entitled, without payment of
                rent, to the use of his/ her official resi-
                dence (the Rastrapathi Bhavan).
                4. He/she is entitled to such emoluments,
                allowances and privileges as may be
                determined by Parliament.

                5. His/ her emoluments and allowances can-
                not be diminished during his/ her term
                of office.

            In 2018, the Parli ament in creased the
            salary of the President from 1.50 lakh to
            S lakh per month. 
                - Vide the Finance Act, 2018, with effect from 1st
                January, 2016. This Act amended the President's
                Emoluments and Pension Act, 1951.
            
            Earlier in 2008, the pen-
            sion of the retired President was increased from
            f3 lakh per annum to 50% of his/her salary
            per month. In addition, the former Presidents
            are entitled to furnished residence, phone
            facilities, car, medical treatment, travel facil-
            ity, secretarial staff and office expenses upto
            fl,OO,OOO per annum. The spouse of a deceased
            President is also entitled to a family pension
            at the rate of 50% of pension of a retired Presi-
            dent, furnished residence, phone facility, car,
            medical treatmen t, travel fac il ity, secretarial
            staff a nd office expenses upto 20, O O O per
            annum .
                - The President's Emoluments and Pension Amend-
                ment Act of2008

            The Preside nc is en titled to a n umber o f
            privileges a nd immu n ities. He/she enjoys
            personal immu nity fro m legal liability fo r
            his/her official acts. Du ring h is/ he r te rm of
            office, he/she is imm u ne fro m a ny crimi-
            nal proceedings, eve n ill respect of his/ her
            personal acts. He/ she ca nnot be arrested
            or imprison ed. However, after g iving two
            months' notice, civil proceedings can be insti-
            tuted against h im/ he r during his/ her term of
            offi ce in respect of hi s/ her pc rsol1 ill acts.

    TERM, IMPEACHME NT AND VACANCY
        Term of President's Office
            The President holds office fo r a term of fi ve
            yea rs from the date on which he/she enters
            upon his/her office. However, he/ she ca n resign
            from h is/ her office at a ny time by addressing
            the resignation letter to the Vice-President.
            Fu rther, he/she can also be removed from the
            office before completion of h is/ her term by the
            process of impeachment.

            The Presiden t ca n ho ld office beyond h is/
            her term of fi ve years u n til his/ her successor
            assumes charge. He/ she is also eligible fo r re-
            election to that office. He/ she may be elected
            for any nu mber of terms. However, in USA, a
            person can not be elected to the o ffice of the
            Presiden t more than twice.
                - NO person except Dr. R."lje nd ra Prasad h,1S occupied
                the office for two te rms.

        Impeachment of President
            The Presiden t can be removed from office by
            a process of i mpeachme nt fo r 'violation of
            the Constitutio n. However, the Constitu tion
            does not define the mea n ing of the ph rase
            'violatio n of the Constitution'.

            The impeachment charges can be in itiated by
            either House of the Parliament. These charges
            should be signed by o ne-fou rth m embers of
            the House (that fra med the charges), and a
            14 days' notice should be given to the Presiden t.
            After the im peachment resolution is passed
            by a majority of two-th irds of the tota l mem-
            bersh ip of that House, it is sent to the other
            House, which should investigate the charges.
            The President has the right to appea r and to be
            represented at such investigation. If the other
            House also susta ins the charges and passes the
            impeachment resolution by a majority of two-
            th irds of the total membersh ip, then the Presi-
            dent stands removed from his/ her office from
            the date on wh ich the resolution is so passed.

            Thus, a n impeachment is a quasi-j udi cia l
            p rocedure in the Parli ame nt. In th is con text,
            two things shou ld be noted: (a) the nomi-
            nated m e mbers of either House of Pari ia ment
            can pa rticipate in the impeachme nt of the
            President though they do not participate in
            his/ her electio n and (b) the elected members
            of the legislative assemblies of states and the
            Un ion Th rritories of Delhi and Puduch erry
            do not participate in the impeachme nt of the
            Presiden t though they partici pa te in h is/ her
            electio n.

            It m ust be noted here that no President has
            so far been impeached.

        Vacancy in the President's Office
            A vacancy in the Preside nt's office can occur
            in a ny o f the fo llowing ways:
                1. On the ex pi ry of his/ her te n ure of five
                yea rs.
                2. By his/ he r resignation.
                3. On h is/ her removal by the process of
                impeachment.
                4. By his/her death.
                    - SO rar two Presidents, Dr. Za kir Hussai n a nd
                    F a khruddi n Ali Ah med, h,we died d uri ng their
                    lcrm of office.
                5. Orherwise, for exa m ple, when he/ she
                becomes disq uali fied to hold office or
                when his/ her elect io n is decla red void.

            When the vaca ncy is going to be ca used
            by the ex piratio n of the term of the sitting
            President, an election to fill the vacancy must
            be held before the expiration of the term . In
            case of any delay in conducting the election
            of new President by any reason, the outgoing
            President continues to hold office (beyond
            his/her term of five yea rs) until hi s/her
            successor assumes charge. This is provided
            by the Constitution in order to prevent an
            'interregnum'. In this situation, the Vice·
            President does not get the opportunity to act
            as President or to discharge the fun ctions of
            the President.

            If the office falls vacant by resignation,
            removal, death or otherwise, then election
            to fill the vacancy should be held within six
            months from the date of the occurrence of
            such a vacancy. The newly-elected President
            remains in office for a fun term of fi ve years
            from the date he/she assumes charge of his/
            her office.

            When a vacancy occurs in the office of the
            President due to his/her resignation, removal,
            death or otherwise, the Vice-President acts as
            the President until a new President is elected.
            Further, when the sitting President is unable
            to discharge his/her fun ctions due to absence,
            illness or any other cause, the Vice-President
            discharges his/ her functions until the Presi-
            dent resumes his/her office.

            In case the offi ce of Vice-President is
            vacant, the Chief Justice of India (or if his/
            her office is also vacant, the seniormost judge
            of the Supreme Court available) acts as the
            President or discharges the functions of the
            Presidents.
                - For exa mpl e, when President Dr. Zakir Hussain
                died in May, 1969, the then Vice-President, V.V. Giri
                was acting as the Presiden t. Soon after V.V. Giri
                resigned to contest the election of the President.
                Then the Chief Justice of India, M. Hidayatullah
                worked as the officiating President from 20 July,
                1969 to 24 August, J969.

            When a ny person, ie, Vice-President, chief
            justice of India , or the seniormost judge of
            the Supreme Court is acting as the President
            or discharging the functions of the President,
            he/she enjoys all the powers and immuni-
            ties of the President and is entitled to such
            emoluments, allowances and privileges as are
            determined by the Parliament.

    POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE PRESIDENT
        The powers e njoyed and the functions per-
        formed by the President can be studied under
        the following heads:
            1. Executive powers
            2. Legislative powers
            3. Financial powers
            4. Judicial powers
            5. Diplomatic powers
            6. Military powers
            7. Emergency powers

        Executive Powers
            The executive powers and fun ctions of the
            President are:
                (a) All executive actions of the Government
                of India are forma11 y taken in hi s/her
                name.

                (b) He/she can make rules specifying the
                ma nner in which the orde rs and other
                instruments made and executed in his/
                her name shall be authenticated.
                
                (c) He/she can make rules for more con-
                venient transaction of business of the
                Union government, and for allocation of
                the said business among the mini sters.
                
                (d) He/she appoints the Prime Minister and
                the other ministers. They hold office
                during his/her pleasure.
                
                (e) He/she appoints the attorney general of
                India and determil.1es his/her remunera-
                tion. The attorney general holds office
                during the pleasure of the President.
                
                (f) He/she appoints the comptrol1er and
                auditor general of India , the chief elec-
                tion commissioner and other election
                commi ss ion ers, the chairman a nd
                members of the Union Public 'Service
                Commission, the governors of states,
                the chairman and members of finance
                commission, and so on.
                
                (g) He/she can seek any information relat-
                ing to the administration of affairs of
                the Union, and proposals for legislation
                from the prime minister.
                
                (h) He/she can require the Prime Minister to
                submit, for consideration of the council
                of m inisters, any matter on which a dcci·
                sion has been ta ken by a mi ni ster bu t,
                which has not been co nside red by the
                counci l.
                
                (i) He/ she can a ppoi nt a co mmiss ion to
                investigate into the condit ions of back·
                wa rd classes.
                
                (j) He/ she can appoi nt an inter·St.'l (e cOll ncil
                to pro mote Centre-state a nd inter-state
                cooperation.
                
                (k) He/ she directly ad ministers the un ion
                te rri to rie s t hro ug h adm in is tra to rs
                appo inted by him/ her.
                
                (i) He/ she can declare a ny area as scheduled
                area a nd has powe rs with respect to the
                administration of scheduled <lfeas a nd
                tribal areas.

        Legislative Powers
            The Presiden t is a n integra l p'::l rt of the Par·
            lia ment of Ind ia, a nd enjoys the fo ll owing
            legislative powers.

                (a) He/she ca n summ o n or prorog ue the
                Parlia ment and disso lve the Lok Sabha .
                He/ she can a lso sum mo n a jOint sit-
                ting of both the Ho uses of Pa rlia men t,
                which is presided over by the Speake r
                o f the Lo k Sabha .

                (b) He/she can address the Parlia ment at the
                co mmenceme nt of the fi rst session after
                each genera l electio n a nd the first ses-
                sio n of each year.
                
                (c) He/ she ca n send messages to the Houses
                of Pa rli a m e n t, whether with respect
                to a bill pendi ng in the Pa rliament or
                otherwise.
                
                (d ) He/she ca n a ppo int a ny m ember of
                the Lok Sabha to preside ove r its pro-
                ceedings when the offi ces of both the
                Spea ker and the Dep uty Spea ker fa ll
                va ca n t. Sim ilarl y, he / s he ca n a lso
                appoin t any me mber of the J t. 1jya Sabha
                to preside over its proceed ings whe n the
                offices of both the Ch'::lirma n and the
                Deputy Chai rma n fall vaca nt.
                
                (e) Hc/she nomina tes 12 members of the
                Rajya Sa bh a from a m o ngst pe rson s
                hav ing specia l knowledge o r
                practical
                experience in literature, sc ience, art a nd
                social service.

                (f) He/ she no m ina ted (before 2020) two
                me mbers to the Lok Sa bha fro m the
                AnglO- Ind ia n co mm uni ty. Howeve r,
                the 104th Consti tu t ional Ame nd m en t
                Ac t of 2019 h,as d isco nt i nu ed thi s
                prov ision.
                
                (g) He/she d ec ides o n qu es ti o ns a s to
                disqu,a li fi cations of me mbe rs of the
                Pa rlia me n t, in consul tati o n with the
                Election Co mm ission.

                (h) Hi s/ he r p ri o r reco mmenda tion or pe r-
                    m issio n is needed to int roduce certain
                    types of bill s in the Pa rl iame nt. They
                    are: ( i) a bill in volvi ng ex pe nd iture
                    fro l11 the Co nso lidated Fu nd of India,
                    ( ii) a bill for the al tem tion of bou nd·
                    a ri es of st,ltes or c reatio n of a new
                    sta te, ( iii ) a mo ney bi ll, ( iv) a bill
                    that im poses o r varies any tax o r duty
                    in whi ch states are inte rested, (v) a
                    bill which varies the mean ing of the
                    ex press ion 'agricul tural in co me' as
                    defined fo r the p urposes of the enact-
                    men ts relat ing to Ind ian income tax,
                    (vi) a bill which affects the pri nci ples
                    o n which sums o f mo ney are or may
                    be d istributable to st.::ItCS a nd (v ii) a
                    bill that im poses (i ny surcha rge on a ny
                    spec ified tax or duty for the pu rpose of
                    the centre.
                    
                    Further, a S late bill imposing restrictions
                    o n the freedo m of trade, co mmerce and
                    intercourse with that st.-1le or within that
                    sl:.:1 te ca n be introduced in the legislature
                    of the state on ly with the previous san c-
                    tio n o f the Preside nt.
                        (i) Whe n a bill is sent to the President afte r
                        it has bee n passed by the Parliam en t,
                        he/ she ca n:
                        ( i) give his/ her asse nt to the bill, o r
                        (ii) withhold his/ he r asselH to the bill,
                        oc
                        ( iii) return the bill ( if it is not a money
                        bi ll ) for reco nsidera tion of the
                        Pa rlia me nt.

                    However, if the bill is passed again
                    by the Parliament, with or without
                    amendments, the President has to
                    give his/ her assent to the bill.

                (j) When a bill passed by a state legislature
                is reserved by the governor for consid-
                eration of the President, the President
                can:
                    (i) give his/ her assent to the bill, or
                    (ii) withhold his/ her assent to the bill,
                    or
                    (iii) direct the governor to return the
                    bill (if it is not a money bill) for
                    reconsideration of the state legisla-
                    ture. It should be noted here that it
                    is not obligatory for the President
                    to give his/her assent even if the
                    bi11 is again passed by the state
                    legislature and sent again t.o him/
                    her for his/ her consideration.

                (k) He/she can promulgate ordinances when
                the Parliament is not in session. These
                ordinances must be approved by the
                Parliament within six weeks from its
                reassembly. He/she can also withdraw
                an ordinance at any time.

                (l) He/she lays the reports of the
                Comptroller and Auditor General, Union
                Public Service Commission, Finance
                Commission, and others, before the
                Parliament.

                (m) He/she can make regulations for the
                peace, progress and good government
                of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands,
                Lakshadweep, Dadra and Nagar Haveli
                and Daman and Diu and Ladakh. In the
                case of Puducherry also, the President
                can legislate by making regulations but
                only when the assembly is suspended or
                dissolved.

        Financial Powers
            The financial powers and functions of the
            President are:
                (a) Money bills can be introduced in
                the Parliament only with his prior
                recommendation.

                (b) He/she causes to be laid before the
                Parliament the annual financial state-
                ment (ie, the Union Budget).
                
                (c) No demand for a grant can be made
                except on his recommendation.
                
                (d) He/she can make advances out of the
                contingency fund of India to meet any
                unforeseen expenditure.
                
                (e) He/she constitutes a finance commission
                after every five years to recommend the
                distribution of revenues between the
                Centre and the states.

        Judicial Powers
            The judicial powers and functions of the
            President are:
                (a) He/she appoints the Chief Justice and
                the judges of Supreme Court and high
                courts.
                (b) He/she can seek advice from the Supreme
                Court on any question of law or fact.
                However, the advice tendered by the
                Supreme Court is not binding on the
                President.
                (c) He/she can grant pardon, reprieve,
                respite and remission of punishment,
                or suspend, remit or commute the sen-
                tence of any person convicted of any
                offence:
                    (i) In al1 cases where the punishment
                    or sentence is by a court martial;
                    (ii) In all cases where the punish-
                    ment or sentence is for an offence
                    against a Union law; and
                    (iii) In all cases where the sentence is
                    a sentence of death.

        Diplomatic Powers
            The · international treaties and agreements
            are negotiated and conc1l!-ded on behalf of
            the President. However, they are subject to
            the approval of the Parliament. He/she rep-
            resents India in international forums and
            affairs and sends and receives diplomats
            like ambassadors, high commissioners, and
            so on.

        Milit ary Powers
            He/ she is the sup reme cOlllma nde r of the
            defence fo rces of India. In that ca pacity, hel
            she a ppoints th e chiefs of the Army, the Navy
            and the Air Force. He/ sh e can decla re war
            o r concl ude peace, subj ect to the a pproval of
            the Parl iam e n t.

        Emergency Powers
            In addition to the n orma l powers mention ed
            above, the Constitution confers extraordinary
            powers o n the Presiden t to deal with the fo 1 ·
            lowi ng th ree types of emergencies:
                (a) Nationa l Em ergency (A rticle 352);
                (b) President's Rule (Article 356 & 365) ; a nd
                (c) Fi nancia l Emergency (Article 360)

            (a) National Emergency: Th e Preside n t can
                proclaim eme rge ncy in the en tire coun try
                or in a ny pa rt of it on the foll owing grounds:
                    (i) War or
                    (ii) Ex ternal aggression or
                    (iii) Armed rebellion

                T h e Pres ide n t acquires t h e followi ng
                extraord in a ry powe rs d u ring a n at ional
                emergency:
                    (i) He/ she can mod ify the pa ttern of the
                    di st r ib u t io n of fin an c ia l reso u rcres
                    between the Union a nd the states.
                    (ii) He/ she ca n suspe nd the Fu nda mental
                    Ri gh ts o f citi zens except the right to li fe
                    and pers01w l liberty (Article 21) and the
                    right to protectio n in respect of comrie-
                    tio n fo r offences (A rti cle 20) .

            (b) President's Rule: It is also known as a
                state emergency or a constitutional e mer-
                gen cy. It can be p rocla imed by the Pres iden t
                o n the fo llowing grou nds:
                    ( i) Failu re of constitutio nal machi nery in the
                    states (Article 356) or
                    ( i i) Fa il ure to comply with or to give effect to
                    directions gi ven by the Un ion (Article
                    365)

                The Pres id e nt acq uires th e fo ll owing
                extraordina ry powers when the Presiden t's
                rule is imposed in a state:

                    (i) He/ she can assign to h imself all or a ny
                    of the functions of the state govern ment
                    and all or any of the powers vested in the
                    governor or anybody or authority in the
                    state.

                    (ii) He/ she can declare that the powers of
                    the state leg islature s hall be exe rcis-
                    able by o r under the authority of the
                    Pa rl ia me nt.
                    
                    (iii) I- ie/ sh e ca n author ise, when the Lok
                    Sa bha is not in sess ion , expe nd iture
                    fro m the Consolidated Fund of the state,
                    pendi ng the sanction of such expe nd i-
                    ture by the Pa rliament.

            (c) Financial Emergency : Th e Pres id ent
                can pro c la i m fi nan c ial e m e rgency if
                he/ s he is sat isfied that the fina n cial sta bil-
                ity or credit of Ind ia or any part the reof, is
                th reaten ed.

                During a fina ncial emergency, the Pres i-
                den t can issue directions for the reductio n
                of salaries a nd allo' wa nces of all or a ny class
                of persons serving in connection with th e
                a ffa irs of the Union, including the judges of
                the Supreme Court and High Courts.

    VETO POWER OF THE PRESIDENT
        A b ill passed by the Pa rl iam en t ca n become
        a n act on ly if it rece ives the assen t of the
        Presiden t. When such a bi ll is p resen ted
        to the Presiden t fo r his assen t, he/ she has
        three a lternatives (u nder Article 111 of the
        COllsti tu tio n):
            1. He/ she may give his assent to the bill, or
            2 . He/ she may withhold his/h er assen t to
            the b ill , or
            3. He/ she may return th e b ill (if it is not a
            Money bill) for reconsideration of the
            Parliamen t. However, if the bilI is passed
            again by the Parlia ment wi th or without
            a mendments and aga in presented to the
            Presiden t, the President must give h is/
            her assent to the b ill.

        Thus, the President has the veto power
        over the bills passed by the Parliament, that
        is, he/she can withhold his/her assent to the
        bills. The object of conferring this power on
        the President is two·fold- (a) to prevent hasty
        and ill·considered legislation by the ParHa·
        ment; and (b) to prevent a legislation which
        may be unconstitutional.
            - 'Veto' is a Latin word that connotes 'forbid'.

        The veto power enjoyed by the executive
        "in modern states can be classified into the
        following four types:
            1. Absolute veto, that is, withholding of
            assent to the biU passed by the legislature.
            
            2. Qualified veto, which can be overridden
            by the legislature with a higher majority.
            
            3. Suspensive veto, which can be overridden
            by the legislature with an ordinary
            majority.
            
            4. Pocket veto, that is, taking no action on
            the bill passed by the legislature.

        Of the above four, the President of India is
        vested with three-absolute veto, suspensive
        veto and pocket veto, There is no qualified veto
        in the case of Indian President; it is possessed
        by the American President. The three vetos of
        the President of India are explained below:

            Absolute Veto
                It refers to the power of the President to
                withhold his assent to a bill passed by the
                Parliament. The bill then ends and does not
                become an act. Usually, this veto is exercised
                in the following two cases:

                    (a) With respect to private members' bills
                    (ie, bills introduced by any member of
                    Parliament who is not a minister); and
                    
                    (b) With respect to the government bills when
                    the cabinet resigns (after the passage
                    of the bills but before the assent by the
                    President) and the new cabinet advises
                    the President not to give his assent to
                    such bills.

                In 1954, President Dr. Rajendra Prasad with-
                held his assent to the PEPSU Appropriation
                Bill. The bill was passed by the Parliament
                when the President's Rule was in operation
                in the state of PEPSU, But, when the bill was
                presented to the President for his assent, the
                President's Rule was revoked.
                    - The Patiala and East Punjab States Union (PEPSU)
                    was merged into the Punjab State in 1956.

                Again in 1991, President R Venkataraman
                withheld his assent to the Salary, Allowances
                and Pension of Members of Parliament
                (Amendment) Bill. The bil1 was passed by the
                Parliament (on the last day before dissolution
                of Lok Sabha) without obtaining the previous
                recommendation of the President.

            Suspensive Veto
                The President exercises this veto when he/she
                returns · a bill for reconsideration of the Par·
                liament. However, if the bill is passed again
                by the Parliament with or without amend·
                ments and again presented to the President,
                it is obligatory for the President to give his
                assent to the biB. This means that the presi·
                dential veto is overridden by a re-passage of
                the bill by the same ordinary majority (and
                not a higher majority as required in USA).

                As mentioned earlier, the President does not
                possess this veto in the case of money bills.
                The President can either give his/ her assent
                to a money bi11 or withhold his/ her assent
                to a money bill but cannot return it for the
                reconsideration of the Parliament. Normally,
                the President gives his/ her assent to a money
                bill as it is introduced in the Parliament with
                his/ her previous permission.

            Pocket Veto
                In this case, the President neither ratifies nor
                rejects nor returns the bill, but simply keeps
                the bill pending for an indefinite period. This
                power of the President not to take any action
                (either positive or negative) on the bill is
                known as the pocket veto. The President can
                exercise this veto power as the Con stitution
                does not prescribe any time-limit within
                wh ich h e/ she has to take the decision with
                respect to a bill presented to him/ her for his/
                her assent. In USA, on the other hand, the
                President has to return the bill for reconsidera-
                tion within 10 days. Hence, it is remarked that
                the pocket of the Indian President is bigger
                than that of the Americ<1 11 President.

                In 1986, President Zail Singh exercised the
                pocket veto with respect to the Indian Post
                Office (Amendment) Bill. The bill, passed by
                the Rajiv Gandhi Government, imposed restric-
                tions on the freedom of press a nd hence, was
                widely criticised. After three years, in 1989, the
                next President R Venkataraman sent the bill
                back for reconsideration, but the new National
                Front Government decided to drop the bill.

                It should be noted here that the President
                has n o veto power in respect of a constitu-
                tional amendment bill. The 24th Consti-
                tutional Amendment Act of 1971 made it
                obligatory for the Preside nt to give his assent
                to a constitutional amendment bill.

        Presidential Veto over State Legislation
            The Preside nt has veto power with respect
            to state legislation also. A bill passed by a
            state legislature can become an act only if
            it receives the assen t of the governor or the
            Pres ident (in case the bill is reserved for the
            consideration of the President).

            Whe n a bill, passed by a sta te legislature, is
            p rese nted to the governor for his/ her assent,
            he/ she has four alternatives (under Article 200
            of the Constitution):

                1. He/ she may give his/ her assent to the
                bill, or
                2 . He/ she may withhold his/h e r assent to
                the bill, or
                3. He/ she may return the bill (if it is not a
                money bill) for reconside ration of the
                state legislature, or
                4. He/ she may reserve the bill for the co n-
                sideration of the Preside nt.

            When a bill is reserved by the governor for
            the con sidera tion of the Pres ident, the Presi-
            dent has three alternatives (Under Article 201
            of the Constitution):

                1. He/ sh e may give his/h er assent to the
                bill, or

                2. He/she may withhold his/ her assent to
                the bill, or
                
                3. He/ she may direct the governor to return
                the bill ( if it is not a money bill ) for
                the reconsideration of the state leg-
                islature. If the bill is passed again by
                the state legislature with or without
                amendments and prese nted again to
                the President for hi s/ h e r assent, the
                President is not bound to give his/her
                assent to the bill. This m ean s that the
                state legislature ca nnot override the
                veto power of the President. Further,
                the Constitution has not prescribed any
                time limit within which the Preside nt
                has to take decision with regard to a
                bill reserved by the governor for his/
                her consideration. He nce, the President
                can exercise poc ket veto in respect of
                state legislation a lso.

            Table 18.2 summarises the discussion on
            the veto power of the Preside nt with rega rd
            to Central as well as state legislation.

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 18.2 Veto Power of the President at a Glance
Central l eg is lat ion With Regard to Ordinary Bills
1. Can be ratlfled
2. Can be rejected
3. Can be returned
State l egislation
1. Can be ratlfled
2. Can be rejected
3. Can be returned "
Central legislation State legislation
With Regard to Money B: I: " :,;. S ~ ______ ~ l1. Can ~;- r~l ~ fl;d • ....,---,-. 2. Can be rejected (but cannot be returned) .• ______ ,= .• ~~......- ___ ._
-~.......,. 1· . ~ Can be ratified
2. Can be rejected (but cannot be returned)
~-~
With Regard to Constitutional Am&ndment Bills
Can only be ratified (that is, cannot be rejected or
returned)
Constitutional amendment bills cannot be introduced in
the state legislature.
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

    ORDINANCE-MAKING POWER OF THE PRESIDENT
        Article 123 of the Constitution empowers the
        President to promulgate ordinances during
        the recess of Parliament. These ordinances
        have the same force and effect as an act of
        Parliament, but .are in the nature of tempo-
        rary laws.

        The ordinance-making power is the most
        important legislative power of the President.
        it has been vested in him/her to deal with
        unforeseen or urgent matters. But, the exer-
        cise of this power is subject to the following
        four limitations:
            1. He/she can promulgate an ordinance
            only when both the Ho,!ses of Parliament
            are not in session or when either of the
            ovo Houses of Parliament is not in ses-
            sion. An ordinance can also be issued
            when only one House is in session
            because a law can be passed by both the
            Houses and not by one House alone. An
            ordinance ' made when both the Houses
            are in session is void. Thus, the power of
            the President to legislate by ordinance is
            not a parallel power of legislation.

            2. He/she can make an ordinance only
            when he/she is satisfied that the circum·
            stances exist that render it necessary for
            him/ her to take immediate action. In the
            Cooper case (Cooper vs. Ullion of India, 1970), 
            the Supreme Court
            held that the President's satisfaction
            can be questioned in a court on the
            ground of malafide. This means that
            the decision of the President to issue an
            ordinance can be questioned in a court
            on the ground that the President has
            prorogued one House or both Houses
            of Parliament deliberately with a view
            to promulgate an ordinance on a con-
            troversial subject, so as to bypass the
            parliamentary decision and thereby
            circumventing the authority of the
            Parliament. The 38th Constitutional
            Amendment Act of 1975 made the
            President's satisfaction final and con-
            clusive and beyond judicial review. But,
            this provision was deleted by the 44th
            Constitutional Amendment Act of 1978.
            Thus, the President's satisfaction is justi-
            ciable on the ground of malafide.

            3. His ordinance-making power is coexten-
            sive as regards all matters except dura-
            tion, with the law-making powers of the
            Parliament. This has two implications:
                (a) An ordinance can be issued only
                on those subjects on which the
                Parliament can make laws.

                (b) An ordinance is subject to the same
                constitutional limitation as an act
                of Parliament. Hence, an ordinance
                cannot abridge or take away any of
                the fundamental rights
                    - The definition of 'law' contained in Article 13
                    expressly includes ordinances.

            4. Every ordinance issued by the President
            during the recess of Parliament must be
            laid before both the Houses of Parliament
            when it reassembles. If the ordinance is
            approved by both the Houses, it becomes
            an act. If Parliament takes no action at
            all, the ordinance ceases to operate on
            the expiry of six weeks from the reas-
            sembly of Parliament. The ordinance
            may also cease to operate even earlier
            than the prescribed six weeks, if both
            the Houses of Parliament pass resolu-
            tions disapproving it. If the Houses of
            Parliament are summoned to reassemble
            on different dates, the period of six
            weeks is calculated from the later of
            those dates. This means that the maxi-
            mum life of an ordinance can be six
            months and six weeks, in case of non-
            approval by the Parliament (six months
            being the maximum gap between the two
            sessions of Parliament). If an ordinance
            is allowed to lapse without being placed
            before Parliament, then the acts done and
            completed under it, before it ceases to
            operate, remain fully valid and effective.

        The President can also withdraw an ord i-
        nance at any time. However, his/ her power
        of ordinance-making is not a discretionary
        power, and he/she can promulgate or ,vithdraw
        an ordinance only on the advice of the council
        of ministers headed by the Prime Minister.

        An ordinance like any other legislation, ca n
        be retrospective, that is, it may come into force
        from a back date. It may modify or repeal any
        act of Parliament or another ordinance. It can
        alter or amend a tax law also. However, it can-
        not be issued to amend the Constitution.

        The ordinance-making power of the Presi-
        dent in India is rather unusual and not found
        in most of the democratic Constitutions of
        the world including that of USA, and UK. In
        justification of the ordinance-making power
        of the President, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar said in the
        Constituent Assembly that the mechanism of
        issuing an ordinance has been devised in order
        to enable the Executive to deal with a situation
        that may suddenly and immediately arise when
        the Parliament is not in session
        . It must be
        clarified here that the ordinance-making power
        of the President has no necessary connection
        with the national emergency envisaged in Arti-
        cle 352. The President can issue an ordinance
        even when there is no war or external aggres-
        sion or armed rebellion.

        The rules of Lok Sabha require that when-
        ever a bill seeking to replace an ordinance is
        introduced in th e House, a statement explain-
        ing the circumsta nces that had necessitated
        immediate legislation by ordinance should
        also be placed before the House.

        The Supreme Court's judgement relating
        to the ordinance-making power of the Gov-
        ernor in the D. C. Wadhwa case (D.C. Wadhwa vs. state of Bihar, 1986) is
        worth mentioning here. In that case, the court
        pointed out that between 1967-1981, the Gover-
        nor of Bihar promulgated 256 ordinances and
        all these were kept in force for periods ranging
        from one to fourteen years by repromulgation
        from time to time. The court ruled that suc-
        cessive repromulgatioll of ordinances with
        the same text without any attempt to get the
        bills passed by the assembly would amoun t
        to violation of the Constitution and the ordi·
        nance so repromulgated is liable to be struck
        down. It held that the exceptional power of
        law-making through ordjnance cannot be used
        as a substitute for the legislative power of the
        state legislature.

    PARDONING POWER OF THE PRESIDENT
        Article 72 of the Constitution empowers the
        President to grant pardons to persons who
        have been tried and convicted of any offence
        in all cases where the:
            1. Punishment or sentence is for an offence
            against a Union Law;
            2. Punishment or sentence is by a court
            martial (military court); a nd
            3. Sentence is a sentence of death.

        The pardoning power of the President is
        independent of the Judiciary. The Presiden t
        while exercising this power, does not sit as a
        court of appeal. The object of conferring this
        judicial power on the President is two-fold:
            (a) to keep the door open for correcting any
            judicial errors in the operation of law; and,

            (b) to afford relief from a sentence, which the
            President regards as unduly harsh.

        The pardoning power of the President
        includes the following:
            1. Pardon It removes both the sentence and
            the eonviction and completely absolves the
            convict from all sentences, punishments and
            disqualifications.
            
            2. Commutation It denotes the substitution of
            one furm of punishment for a lighter form. For
            example, a death sentence may be commuted to
            rigorous imprisonment, which in turn may be
            commuted to a simple imprisonment.
            
            3. Remission It implies reducing the period
            of sentence without changing its character.
            For example, a sentence of rigorous imprison-
            ment for two years may be remitted to rigor-
            ous imprisonment for one year.
            
            4. Respite It denotes awarding a lesser
            sentence in place of one originally awarded
            due to some special fact, such as the physical
            disability of a convict or the pregnancy of a
            woman offender.
            
            5. Reprieve It implies a stay of the execution
            of a sentence (especially that of death) for a
            temporary period. Its purpose is to enable
            the convict to have time to seek pardon or
            commutation from the President.

        Under Article 161 of the Constitution, the
        governor of a state also possesses the pardon-
        ing power. Hence, the governor can also grant
        pardons, reprieves, respites and remissions of
        punishment or suspend, remit and commute
        the sentence of any person convicted of any
        offence against a state law. But, the pardoning
        power of the governor differs from that of the
        President in following two respects:

            1. The President can pardon sentences
            inflicted by court martial (military
            courts) while the governor cannot.
            
            2. The President can pardon death sentence
            while governor cannot. Even if a state law
            prescribes death sentence, the power to
            grant pardon lies with the President and
            n.ot the governor. However, the governor
            can suspend, remit or commute a death
            sentence. In other words, both the gover-
            nor and the President have concurrent
            power in respect of suspension, remission
            and commutation of death sentence.

        In Kehar Singh case (Kehar Singh vs. Union of India, 1988), the Supreme
        Court examined the pardoning power of the
        President and laid down the following principles:
            1. The petitioner for mercy has no right to
            an oral hearing by the President.

            2. The President Can examine the evidence
            afresh and take a view different from the
            view taken by the court.
            
            3. The power is to be exercised by the
            President on the advice of the union
            cabinet.
            
            4. There is no need for the Supreme Court
            to lay down specific guidelines for the
            exercise of power by the President.
            
            5. The exercise of power by the President is
            not subject to judicial review except where
            the presidential decision is arbitrary, irra-
            tional, mala fide or discriminatory.

    CONSTITUTIONAL POSITION OFTHE PRESIDENT
        The Constitution of India has provided for
        a parliamentary form of government. Conse-
        quently, the President has been made only a
        nominal executive; the real executive being
        the council of ministers headed by the prime
        minister. In other words, the President has to
        exercise his/her powers and functions with
        the aid and advise of the council of ministers
        headed by the Prime Minister.

        Dr. B.R. Ambedkar summed up the true posi-
        tion of the President in the following way.
            "In the Indian Constitution, there is placed
            at the head of the Indian Union a function·
            ary who is called the President of the Union.
            The title of the functionary reminds of the
            President of the United States. But beyond
            the identity of names, there is nothing in
            common between the form of governmen t
            prevalent in America a nd the form of gov-
            ernment adopted under the Indian Constitu-
            tion. The America n form of governm ent is
            called the presidential system of government
            and what the Indian Constitution adopted
            is the Parliam en ta ry syste m . Under the
            presiden tial system of America, the Presi-
            dent is the Chief head of the Executive a nd
            admin istrat ion is vested in him . Under the
            Indian Constitution, the President occupies
            the same position as the King under th e
            English Constitution. He is the head of the
            State but not of the Executi ve. He represents
            the nation but does not rule the nation. He
            is the symbol of the nation . His place in
            administration is that of a ceremon ial device
            or a seal by which the na tion's decisions a re
            made knowll . He is generally bound by the
            advice of his ministers. He ca n do nothillg
            contrary to their advice nor can he do any-
            thing without their advice. The President of
            the United States can dismiss any secretary at
            any time. Th e President of the Indian Union
            has no power to do so, so long as his ministers
            command a majority in Parliament".
                - Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume VII, pp. 32-34.

        In estimating the constitutional position
        of the President, particular reference has to
        be made to the provisions of Articles 53, 74
        and 75. These are:
            1. The executive power of the Union sha ll
            be vested in President an d sha]] be
            exercised by hi m/her either directly or
            through officers subordinate to him / her
            in accorda nce with this Constitution
            (Article 53).
            2 . There shall be a council of ministers with
            the Prime Minister at the head to aid
            and advise the President who 'shall', in
            the exercise of his/her functions, act in
            accordance with such advice (Article 74) .
            3. The council of ministers shaH be col-
            lectively respon sible to the Lok Sabha
            (Article 75). This provisioll is the fo un-
            dation of thc parlia mentary system of
            government.

        The 42nd Constitu t ional Ame ndment
        Act of 1976 (enacted by the Indira Gandh i
        Government) made the President bound by
        the advice of the council of mi nisters headed
        by the Pri me Minister• The 44th Constitu-
        tiona1 A.me ndment Act of 1978 (enacted by the
        Janata Party Government headed by Morarj i
        Desai) authorised the President to require the
        council of m in isters to reconsider such advice
        either generally or otherwise. However, he/
        she 'shall' act in accordan ce with the advice
        tendered after such reconsideration. In other
        wo rds, the President may return a matter once
        fo r reconsideration of his/her ministers, but
        the reconsidered advice shall be binding.
            - In the origina l Constitu ti on, there was no such
            specific provision in Article 74.

        In October 1997, the cabinet recommended
        President K.R Narayanan to impose President's
        Rule (under Article 356) in Uttar Pradesh. The
        President returned the matter for the recon-
        sideration of the cabi net, which then decided
        not to move ahead in the matter. Hence, the
        BJP-Ied government under Kalyan Singh was
        saved. Again in September 1998. the President
        KR Narayanan returned a recommendation
        of the cabinet that sought the imposition of
        the President's R ule in Bihar. After a couple
        of months, the cabinet re-advised the same.
        It was only then that the President's Rule was
        imposed in Bihar, in February 1999.

        Though the President has 110 constitutional
        discretion, he/ she has some situational dis-
        cretion. In other words, the President call act
        on his/ her discretion (that is, without the
        advice of the ministers) under the followi ng
        situations:

            (i) Appoin tment of Prime Min ister when
            no party has a clear majority in the
            Lo k Sabha or when the Prime Minister
            in office dies suddenly a nd there is no
            obvious successor.
            (ii) Dismissal of the council of ministers
            when it can not prove the confidence of
            the Lok Sabha.
            (iii) Dissolution of the Lok Sabha if the coun-
            cil of ministers has lost its majority.

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 18.3 Articles Related to President at a Glance
Article No Subject-matter
52. The President of India
53. Executive power of the Union
54. Election of President
55. Manner of election of President
56. Term of office of President
57. Eligibility for re-election
58. Qualifications for election as President
59. Conditions of President's office
60. Oath or affirmation by the President
61 . Procedure for impeachment of the President
62. Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of President
65. Vice-President to act as President or to discharge his functions
71. Matters relating to the election of President
72. Power of President to grant pardons etc., and to suspend, remit or commute sentences In certain cases
74, Council of ministers to aid and advise the President
75. Other provisions as to ministers like appointment, term, salaries, etc.
76. Attorney-General of India
77. Conduct of business of the Government of India
78. Duties of Prime Minister in respect to furnishing of Information to the President, etc.
85. Sessions of Parliament, prorogation and dissolution
111. Assent to bills passed by the Parliament
112. Union Budget (annual financial statement)
123. Power of President to promulgate ordinances
143. Power of President to consult Sup ~ ,~ e ~ m ~ e _ C ~o ~ u ~ " ,,-_
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 18.4 Presidential Election, 2022 (Value of Votes of elected MLAs and MPS)17
51 No NAME OF STATEI NUMBER OF POPULATION VALUE OF VOTE TOTAL VALUE
UNION TERRITORY ASSEMBLY 11971 CENSUS) OF EACH M L A OF VOTES FOR
SEATS THE STATE
(ELECTIVE)
ANDHRA PRADESH 175 27800586 159 159 " 175 = 27825
2 ARUNACHAL PRADESH 60 467511 8 008 " 060 :;: 480
3 ASSAM 126 14625152 116 116" 126 = 14616
I 4 BIHAR 243 42126236 173 173 " 243 :;: 42039
5 CHHATTISGARH 90 11637494 129 129" 090 '" 11610
6 GOA 40 795120 20 020 " 040 = 800
SI. No. NAME OF STATEI
UNION TERRITORY
NUMBER OF
ASSEMBLY
SEATS
(elECTIVE)
7 GUJARAT 182 26697475
8 HARYANA 90 10036808
9 HIMACHAL PRADESH 68 3460434
10 JHARKHAND 81 14227133
11 KARNATAKA 224 29299014
12 KERALA 140 21347375
13 MADHYA PRADESH 230 30016625
14 MAHARASHTRA 288 50412235
15 MANIPUR 60 1072753
16 MEGHALAYA 60 1011699
17 MIZORAM 40 332390
18 NAGALAND 60 516449
19 ODI$HA 147 21944615
20 PUNJAB 117 13551060
21 RAJASTHAN 200 25765806
22 SIKKIM 32 209843
23 TAMIL NADU 234 41199168
24 TELANGANA 119 15702122
25 TR IPURA 60 1556342
26 UTIARAKHAND 70 4491239
27 UTTAR PRADESH 403 83849905
28 WEST BENGAl. 294 44312011
29 NCT OF DELHI 70 4065698
30 UT OF PUDUCHERRY 30 471707
TOTAL 4033 54] 002005
POPULATION VALUE OF VOTE
(1971 CENSUS) OF EACH M.L.A.
TOTAL VALUE
OF VOTES FOR
THE STATE
147
112
51
176
131
t52
131
175
18
17
8
9
149
116
129
7
176
132
26
64
208
151
58
16
147)( 182 = 26754
112 x 090= 10080
051 )< 068 = 3468
176 x 081 = 14256
131 "224=29344
152 x 140 = 21280
131 ><230=30130
118 x 288" 50400
018)( 060 '" 1080
017 x 060 = 1020
008 " 040 = 320
009 x 060 = 540
149" 147 = 21903
116 :0: 117'"' 13572
129 )( 200 = 25800
007 x 032 = 224
176" 234 = 41184
132 x 119 = 15708
026)< 060 =. 1560
064 )( 070 = 4480
208 )< 403 =. 83824
151 11294 = 44394
058 )< 070 = 4060
016 II 030 = 480
= 543231


I?This information is obtained from the official website of the Election Commission of India
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

(A) VALUE OF EACH VOTE OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT,
    TOTAL MEMBERS - LOK SABHA (543) + RAJYA SABHA (233) = 776
    VALUE OF EACH VOTE = 5,43,231/776 = 700
(B) TOTAL VALUE OF VOTES OF
    776 MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT = 700 x 776 = 5,43,200
(C) TOTAL ELECTORS FOR THE
    PRESIDENT ELECTION = MLAs (4033) + M.Ps (776) = 4809
(D) TOTAL VALUE OF VOTES OF 4809 ELECTORS FOR
    THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION 2022 = 5,43,231 + 5,43,200 = 10,86,431


CHAPTER 19: VICE-PRESIDENT

    The Vice-President occupies the second
    highest office in the country. Hel she is
    accorded a rank next to the President
    in the official warrant of precedence. This
    office is modelled on the lines afthe American
    Vice-President.

    ELECTION
        The V,ice-President, like the President, is
        elected not directly by the people but by
        the method of indirect election. He/she is
        elected by the members of an electoral college
        consisting of the members of both Houses of
        Parliament.
            - The original Constitution provided that the Vice-
            President would be elected by the two Houses of
            Parliament assembled at a joint meeting. This
            cumbersome procedure was done away by the 11th
            Constitutional Amendment Act of 1961.

        Thus, this electoral college is
        different from the electoral college for the
        election of the President in the following
        two respects: .
            1. It consists of both elected and nominated
            members of the Parliament (in the case
            of president, only elected members).
            
            2. It does not include the members of the
            state legislative assemblies (in the
            case of President, the elected members
            of the state legislative assemblies are
            included). Explaining the reason for
            this difference, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar
            observed:2

        "The President is the head of the State
        and his/her power extends both to the
        administration by the Centre as well as to
        the states. Consequently, it is necessary
        that in his/ her election, not only mem-
        bers of Parliament should play their part,
        but the members of the state legislatures
        should have a voice, But, when we come
        to the Vice-President, his/ her normal
        functions are to preside over the council
        of states. It is only on a rare occasion,
        and that too for a temporary period, that
        he/she may be called upon to assume the
        duties of the president. That being so, it
        does not seem necessary that the mem-
        bers of the state legislatures should also
        be invited to take part in the election of
        the Vice-Presidene."
            - Consrituen t Assembly Debates, Volume VII, p. 1001.

        But, the manner of election is same in both
        the cases. Thus, the Vice-President's election,
        like that of the President's election, is held in
        accordance with the system of proportional
        representation by means of the single trans-
        ferable vote and the voting is· by secret ballot.

        All doubts and disputes in connection with
        election of the Vice-President are inquired
        into and decided by the Supreme Court whose
        decision is final. The election of a person as
        Vice-President cannot be challenged on the
        ground that the electoral college was incom-
        plete (i.e., existence of any vacancy among
        the members of electoral college). If the elec-
        tion of a person as Vice-President is declared
        void by the Supreme Court, acts done by him/
        her before the date of such declaration ofthe
        Supreme Court are not invalidated (Le., they
        continue to remain in force).

        The various vice-presidential elections held
        so far are summarised in TItble 19.1.

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 19. 1 Elections of the Vice-Presidents (1952-till now)
SI Election VlCtorrous No of Votes Runner-up No of Votes
No Year Candidate secured Candidate sec ured
1. 1952 Dr. S. Radhakrishnan
2. 1957 Dr. S . Radhakrlshnan
3. 1962 Dr. Zak!r Hussain
4. 1967 V. V. Girl
5. 1969 G.S. Pathak
6. 1974 B.D. JeUi
7. 1979 M. Hldayatullah
8. 1984 R . Venkataraman
9. 1987 Dr. Shankar Dayal Sharma
10. 1992 K.R. Narayanan
11 . 1997 Krishna Kant
12. 2002 B.S. Shekhawat
13. 2007 Mohd. Hamid Ansari
14. 2012 Mohd. Hamid Ansari
15. 2017 Venkaiah Naidu
16. 2022 Jagdeep Dhankar
Unopposed
unopposeg
568 N. Samant Singh 14
486 Prof. Habib 192
400 HV Kamath 156
521 N.E. Horo 141
Unopposed
508 B.C. Kambley 207
Unopposed
700 !(aka Joglnder Singh 01
441 Surjeet Singh Barnala 273
454 Shushll Kumar Shlnde 305
455 Najma Heptullah 222
490 Jaswant Singh 238
516 Gopal Krishna Gandhi 244
528 Mar ret Alve 182
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

    QUALIFICATIONS, OATH AND CONDITIONS
        Qualifications
            To be eligible for election as Vice-President, a
            person should fulfil the following qualifications:
                1. He/she should be a citizen of lndia.

                2. He/ she should have completed 35 years
                of age.

                3. He/ she should be qualified for election
                as a member of the Rajya Sabha.

                4. He/ she should not hold any office of
                profit under the Union government
                or any state government or any local
                authority or any other public authority.

            But, a sitting President or Vice-President of
            the Union, the governor of any state and a min-
            ister for the Union or any state is not deemed
            to hold any office of profit and hence qualified
            for being a candidate for Vice-President.

            Further, the nomination of a candidate
            for election to the office of Vice-President
            must be subscribed by at least 20 electors as
            proposers and 20 electors as seconders. Every
            candidate has to make a security deposit of
            15,OOO in the Reserve Bank of India.
                - Presidential and Vice-Presidential Elections Act,
                1952 as amended in 1997.

        Oath or Affirmation
            Before entering upon his/her office, the
            Vice-President has to make and subscribe to
            an oath or affirmation. In his/ her oath, the
            Vice-President swears:

                1. To bear true faith and allegiance to the
                Constitution of India; and
                
                2. 1b faithful1y discharge the duties of h is I
                her office.

            The oath of office to the Vice·President is
            administered by the President or some person
            appointed in that behalf by him/ her.

        Conditions of Office        
            The Constitution lays down the following two
            conditions of the Vice·President's office:
                1. He/she should not be a member of either
                House of Parliament or a House of the
                state legislature. If a ny such person is
                elected as the Vice·President, he/she is
                deemed to have vacated the seat in that
                House on the date on which he/she
                enters upon the office as Vice-President.

                2. He/she should not hold any other office
                of profit.

    TERM AND VACANCY
        Term of Office
            The Vice-President holds office for a tenn of
            five years from the date on which he/ she enters
            upon his/ her office. However, he/ she can resign
            from his/ her office at any time by addressing
            the resignation letter to the President. He/ she
            can also be removed from the office before
            completion of his/ her tenn. A formal impeach-
            ment is not required for his/ her removal. He/
            she can be removed by a resolution passed by a
            majority of all the then members of the Rajya
            Sabha and agreed to by the Lok Sabha. This
            means that this resolution should be passed in
            the Rajya Sabha by an effective majority and
            in the 10k Sabha by a simple majority. Further,
            this resolution can be introduced only in the
            Rajya Sabha and not in the Lok Sabha. But, no
            such resolution can be moved unless at least 14
            days' advance notice has been given. Notably,
            no ground has been mentioned in the Constitu-
            tion for his/ her removal.

            The Vice-President can hold office beyond
            his/her term of five years until his/ her suc·
            cessor assumes charge. He/ she is also eligible
            for re·election to that office. He/she may be
            elected for any number of terms.
                - Dr. S. Radhakrishnan was elected for a second term

        Vacancy in Office
            A vaca ncy in the Vice-President's office can
            occur in any of the following ways:
                1. On the expiry of his/ her tenure of five
                years
                
                2. By his/her resignation
                
                3. On his/ her removal
                
                4. By his/ her death
                    - 5K.rishna Kant was the first Vice-President to die in office.
                
                5. Otherwise, for example, when he/she
                becomes disqualified to hold office or
                when his/her election is declared void.

            When the vacancy is going to be caused by
            the expiration of the term of the sitting vice-
            preSident, an election to fill the vacancy must
            be held before the expiration of the term.

            If the office falls vacant by resignation,
            removal, death or otherwise, then election
            to fill the vaca ncy should be held as soon as
            possible after the occurrence of the vacancy.
            The newly·elected vice-president remains in
            office for a full term of five years from the
            date he/ she assumes charge of his/ her office.

    POWERS AND FUNCTIONS
        The functions of the Vice-President are two-fold:
            1. He/she acts as the ex-officio Chairman of
            Rajya Sabha. In this capacity, hislher pow-
            ers and functions are similar to those of
            the Speaker of Lok Sabha. In this respect,
            he/ she resembles the America n vice-
            president, who also acts as the Chainnan
            of the Senate-the Upper House of the
            American legislature.

            2. He/ she acts as President when a vacancy
            occurs in the office of the President due
            to his/ h er resignation, impeachment,
            death or otherwise.6 He/ she can act as
            President only for a maximum period of
            six months within which a new President
            has to be elected. Further, when the sit-
            ting President is unable to discha rge
            his/ her fun ctions due to absence, illness
            or any other cause, the Vi ce-President
            discharges his/ her fun ctions until the
            President resumes his/ her office.
                - When two Presidents, Dr. Zakir Hussain and Fakruddin
                Ali Ahmed, died in office, the then respective Vice-
                Presidents, V.V. Girl and B.D. Jatti acted as President
                - The Vice-President, Dr. S. Radhakrishnan discharged
                the fu nctions of the President in J une 1960, when
                the then President Dr. Rajendra Prasad was on a
                15-day tour to the USSR a nd aga in in July 1961, when
                he/she (Dr. Rajendra Prasad) was very ill.

        While acting as President or discharging
        the functions of President, the Vice-Presiden t
        does not perfo rm the duties of the offi ce of
        the chairman of Raj ya Sabha . During this
        period, those duties are performed by the
        Deputy Cha irman of Rajya Sabha.

        The Constitution has not fixed a ny emolu-
        ments for the Vice-President in that capacity.
        He/ she draws his/ her regular salary in his/
        her capacity as the ex-officio Chairman of
        the Rajya Sabha. In 2018, the Parliament
        increased the salary of the Cha irma n of the
        Raj ya Sabha from 1.2S lakh to 4 lakh per
        months. Earlier in 2008, the pension of the
        retired Vice-President was increased from
        20,000 per month to 50% of his/ her sala ry
        pcr m onth. In addition , he/ she is entitled
        to daily allowance, free furni shed residence,
        medical, travel a nd other facilities.
            - Vide the Finan ce Act, 201 8, with effect from 1st
            January, 201 6. This Act amended the Salaries and
            Allowa nces of Officers of Parliament Act, 1953.
            - The Yice-President's Pension (Amendment) Act,
            2008. This Act amended the Yice-President's Pension
            Act, 1997.

        During a ny period when the Vice-President
        acts as President or discharges the functi o ns
        of the President, he/ she is not entitled to the
        salary or allowance payable to the Chairma n
        of Raj ya Sabha, but the salary and allowance
        of the President.

    INDIAN AND AMERICAN VICE-PRESIDENTS COMPARED
        Though the office of the Indian Vice-President
        is modelled on t h ~ lines of the American
        Vice-President, there is a diffe ren ce. The
        American Vice-Preside nt succeeds to the
        presidency when it fa lls vacant, and remains
        President for the unexpired term of his/ her
        predecessor. The Indian Vice-President, on
        the other hand, does not assume the offi ce
        of the President when it falls vaca nt for the
        unexpired term . He/ she merely serves as
        an acting President until the new President
        assumes cha rge.

        It is evident tha t the Constitution has
        not assigned any significant function to the
        Vice-President in that capacity. Hence, some
        schola rs call him/ her 'His Superfluous High-
        ness'. This office was created with a view
        to mainta in the political continuity of the
        Indian State.

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 19.2 Articles R elated to Vice-President at a Glance
Article No. Subject-matter
63. The Vice-President of India
64. The Vice-President to be ex-officio Chairman of the Council of States
65. The Vice-President to act as President or to discharge his/her functions during casual vacancies In the
office. or during the absence, of President
66. Election of Vice-President
67. Term of office of Vice-President
68. Time of holding election to fill vacancy In the offiCe of Vice-President and the term of office of person
elected to fill casual vacancy
69. Oath or affirmation by the Vice-President
70. Discharge of President's functions In other contingencies
7 1. Matters relating to, or connected with, the election of Vice-President
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------


CHAPTER 20: PRIME MINISTER

    In the scheme of parliamentary system of
    government provided by the constitution,
    the President is the nominal executive
    authority (de jure executive) and Prime Min-
    ister is the real executive authority (de facto
    executive). In other words, President is the
    head of the State while Prime Minister is the
    head of the government.

    APPOINTMENT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
        The Constitution does not contain any
        specific procedure for the selection and
        appointment of the Prime Minister. Article
        75 says only thafthe Prime Minister shall be
        appointed by the President. However, this does
        not imply that the President is free to appoint
        anyone as the Prime Minister. In accordance
        with the conventions of the parliamentary
        system of government, the President has to
        appoint the leader of the majority party in
        the Lok Sabha as the Prime Minister. But,
        when no party has a clear majority in the Lok
        Sabha, then the President may exercise his/
        her personal discretion in the selection and
        appointment of the Prime Minister. In such
        a Situation, the President usually appoints
        the leader of the largest party or coalition
        in the Lok Sabha as the Prime Minister and
        asks him/ her to seek a vote of confidence in
        the House within a month. This discretion
        was exercised by the President, for the first
        time in 1979, when Nee1am Sanjiva Reddy
        (the then President) appointed Charan Singh
        (the coalition leader) as the Prime Minister
        after the fall of the Janata Party government
        headed by Morarji Desai.

        There ·is also one more situation when
        the President may have to exercise his/ her
        individual judgement in the selection and
        appointment of the Prime Minister, that
        is, when the Prime Minister in office dies
        suddenly and there is no obvious successor.
        This is what happened when Indira Gandhi
        was assassinated in 1984. The then President
        Zail Singh appointed Rajiv Gandhi as the
        Prime Minister by ignoring the precedent
        of appointing a caretaker Prime Minister.l
        Later on, the Congress parliamentary party
        unanimously elected him as its leader. How-
        ever, if, on the death of an incumbent Prime
        Minister, the ruling party elects a new leader,
        the President has no choice but to appoint
        him/ her as Prime Minister.
            - On the death oC Jawaharlal Nehru and Lal Bahadur
            Shastri when the leadership was contested, the Presi-
            dent made temporary arrangements by appointing
            the senionnost minister as the Prime Minister, until
            the Connal election of the leader by the party. Both
            the times, it was Gulzari Lal Nanda who acted as the
            Prime Minister.

        In 1980, the Delhi High Court held that the
        Constitution does not require that a person
        must prove hislher majority in the 10k Sabha
        before he/she is appointed as the Prime Min-
        ister. The President may first appoint himlher
        as the Prime Minister and then ask himlher to
        prove his majority in the Lok Sabha within a
        reasonable period. For example, Charan Singh
        (1979), V.P. Singh (1989), Chandrasekhar (1990),

        P.V. Narasi mha Ra.o ( 1991), A.B. Vajyapce (1996),
        Deve Gowda ( 1996), LK. Guj ra l ( 1997) and again
        A.B. Vajpayee (1998) were appointed as Prime
        Min isters in th is way.

        In 1997, the Sup reme Court held that a
        person who is not a member of either I -louse
        o f Parl ia ment can be appoin ted as Prime
        Min ister for six months, within wh ich, he!
        she should beco me a member of either House
        of Parliament; otherwise, he/ she ceases to be
        the Prime Mini ster.

        Constitutionally, the Prime Min ister may
        be a member of any of the two Houses of pa r-
        liament. For example, three Prime Min isters,
        Indi ra Gandhi (1966), Ocve Gowda (1 996) and
        Manmohan Singh (2004), were m embers of the
        Rajya Sabha. In Brita in, on the other hand, the
        Prime Min ister should definitely be a member
        of the Lower House (House of Commons).

    OATH, TERM AND SALARY
        B efore the Prime Minister enters upon his/ her
        office, the President administers to him/ her the
        oaths of office and secrecy. 
            - The fonn of oath of office and secrecy for the Prime
            Minister is sim il ar to that fo r any Union minister.

        In his/ her oath of office, the Prime Minister swears:
            1. to bear true fa ith and allegia nce to the
            Constitution of India ,
            2. to uphold the sovere ignty and integrity
            of Ind ia,
            3. to fa ith fully an d con scie ntio usly dis-
            charge the duties of his/ her office, and
            4 . to do right to a ll manner of people in
            accorda nce with the Constitution and
            the law, without fear o r favour, affection
            or ill will.

        I n hi s/ h er oath of secrecy, the Prime
        Minister swea rs that he/ she wi ll not directly
        o r indirectly com municate or reveal to a ny
        person(s) any matter that is b ro ugh t under
        his/ her consideration or becomes known to
        him/ her as a Unio n Min ister except as may
        be required fo r the due discharge of his/ her
        duties as such minister.

        The term of the Prime Minister is not fi xed
        and he/ she holds office during the pleasure
        of the President. However, th is does not mean
        tha t the Preside n t can dism iss the Prime
        Mi niste r at a ny tim e. So lo ng as the Prime
        Min ister enjoys the majority support in the
        Lok Sabha, he/ she can not be dismissed by
        the President. However, if he/ she loses the
        co nfidence of the Lok Sabha, he/ she must
        resign or t he President can dismiss him / hcr.
            - For example, V. P. Si ngh in 1990 and Deve Gowda in
            1997 resigned after defeat in the L ok S abha

        The sa la ry a nd allowances of the Prim e
        Min ister are determined by the Parliament
        from tim e to time. He/ she gets the salary
        a nd allowances that are payable to a membe r
        o f Parlia m ent. Additiona lly, he/ she gets a
        sumptuary a ll owance, free accommodation,
        travelling allowance, medical fa cilities, etc. In
        2001 , the Parliament increased the sum ptuary
        a llowance from tl ,500 to t3,000 per month3b.
            - The Salaries a nd Allowances of Mi nisters A ct,
            1952, has been passed for this purpose.
            - The Salaries and Allowances of Ministers (A mend·
            ment) A ct, 2001 .
        
    POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE PRIME MINISTER
        The powers a nd fun ctions of Prime Minister
        can be studied under the fo llowi ng heads:
            In Relation to Council of Ministers
                The Prime Minister enjoys the following pow-
                ers as head of the Unio n council of ministers:
                
                    1. He/ she recommends persons who can be
                    appointed as ministers by the Presiden t.
                    The President ca n appo in t on ly those
                    persons as ministers who are recom-
                    mended by the Prime Min ister.

                    2. He/ she a llocates and reshuffles various
                    portfolios am ong the ministers.
                
                    3. He/ she ca n ask a minister to resign or
                    advise the President to dis m iss him/ her
                    in case of differe nce of opinion.
                
                    4 . He/ she presides over the meet ing of
                    council of ministers and influences its
                    decisions.
                
                    5. He/ she guides, directs, controls, and coor-
                    dinates the activities of all the ministers.
                    
                    6. Helshe can bring about the collapse of
                    the council of ministers by resigning
                    from office.

                Since the Prime Minister stands at the
                head of the council of ministers, the other
                ministers cannot function when the Prime
                Minister resigns or dies. In other words, the
                resignation or death of an incumbent Prim,e
                Minister automatically dissolves the councIl
                of ministers and thereby generates a vacuum.
                The resignation or death of any other min-
                ister, on the other hand. merely creates a
                vacancy which the Prime Minister mayor
                may not like to filL

            In Relation to the President
                The Prime Minister enjoys the following
                powers in relation to the President:
                    1. Helshe is the principal channel of com-
                    munication between the President and
                    the council of ministers. 
                        - Article 78 specifically deals with this function of the Prime Minister.

                    It is the duty of the prime minister:
                        (a) to communicate to th~ Presi~e?t all
                        decisions of the counCIl of ministers
                        relating to the administration of the
                        affairs of the Union and proposals
                        for legislation;
                        (b) to furnish such information relating
                        to the administration of the affairs
                        of the Union and proposals for legis-
                        lation as the President may call for;
                        and
                        (c) if the President so requires, to sub-
                        mit for the consideration of the
                        council of ministers any matter on
                        which a decision has been taken by
                        a minister but which has not been
                        considered by the council.

                    2. He/she advises the President with regard
                    to the appointment of important offi-
                    cials like attorney general of India,
                    Comptroller and Auditor General of
                    India chairman and members of the
                    UPSC, election commissioners, chair-
                    man and members of the finance com-
                    mission and so on.

            In Relation to Parliament
                The Prime Minister is the leader of the Lower
                House. In this capacity, he/ she enjoys the
                following powers:
                    1. He/ she advises the President with regard
                    to summoning and proroguing of the
                    sessions of the Parliament.

                    2. He/she can recommend dissolution of the
                    Lok Sabha to President at any time.
                    
                    3. He/she announces government policies
                    on the floor of the House.

            Other Powers &- Functions
                In addition to the above-mentioned three
                major roles, the Prime Minister has various
                other roles. These are:
                    1. He/ she is the chairman of the NITI
                    Aayog (which succeeded the plann.ing
                    commiSSion), National Integrahon
                    Council, Inter-State Council, National
                    Water Resources Council and some other
                    bodies.

                    2. He/ she 'plays a significant role in shaping
                    the foreign policy of the country.
                    
                    3. He/ she is the chief spokesman of the
                    Union government.
                    
                    4. He/ she is the crisis manager-in-chief at
                    the political level during emergencies.
                    
                    5. As a leader of the nation, he/ she meets
                    various sections of people in different
                    states and receives memoranda from
                    them regarding their problems, and
                    so on.
                    
                    6. He/ she is leader of the party in power.
                    
                    7. He/ she is political head of the services.

                Thus, the Prime Minister plays a very
                significant and highly crucial role in the
                politico-administrative system of the country.
                Dr. B.R. Ambedkar stated, 'If any functionary
                under our constitution is to be compared with
                the us President, he is the Prime Minister
                and not the President of the Union'.

    ROLE DESCRIPTIONS
        The various comments made by the eminent
        political scientists and constitutional experts
        on the role of Prime Minister in Britain holds
        good in the Indian context also. These are
        mentioned below:

            Lord Morely He described Prim e Minister
            as 'primus inter pares' (first among equals)
            and 'key stone of the cabinet arch'. He sa id,
            "The head of the cabi net is 'primus inter
            pares', and occupied a position which so long
            as it lasts, is one of exceptional and peculiar
            authority".

            Herbert Marrison ~As the head of the
            Government, he (prime minister) is 'primus
            intcr pares'. But, it is today for too mod-
            est an appreciation of the Prime Minister's
            position".

            Sir William Vernor Harcourt He described
            Prime Min ister as 'inter stellas luna minores'
            (a moon among lesser stars).

            Jennings ~Hc is, rather, a sun around which
            planets revolve. He is the key-stone of the
            constitution. All roads in the constitution
            lead to the Prime Minister."

            H .J. Laski On the relationship between the
            Prime Minister and the cabinet, he said that
            the Prime Minister ~is central to its forma-
            tion, central to its life, and cen tral to its
            death". He described him as ~t h e pivot around
            which the entire governmental machinery
            revolves."

            H . R. G. Greaves "The Government is the
            master of the country and he (Prime Minister)
            is the master of the Government."

            Munro He called Prime Minister as ~the
            captain of the ship of the state".

            Ramsay Muir He described Prime Minister
            as "the steersman of steering wheel of the
            ship of the state."

        The role of the Prim e Minister in the
        British parl iamentary government is so
        sign ifica nt and crucial that observers like
        to ca ll it a 'Prime Ministerial governmen t.'
        Thus, R.H. Crossman says, 'The post-war
        epoch has been the final transformatio n of
        cabinet government into Prime Ministerial
        government.' Similarly, Humphrey Berkely
        points out, 'Parliamen t is not, in practice,
        sovereign. The parliam e ntary democracy
        has now collapsed at Westm inster. The basic
        defect in the British syste m o f govern ing is
        the super-ministerial powers of the Prim e
        Minister: The same description holds good
        to the Indian context too.

    RELATIONSHIP WITH THE PRESIDENT
        The following provisions of the Constitution
        dea l with the relationship between the Presi-
        dent a nd the Prime Minister:

            1. Article 74 There shall be a council of
            ministers with the Prime Minister at the
            head to aid and advise the President who
            shall, in the exercise of his/ her functions,
            act in accordance with such advice. However,
            the President may requ ire the counc il of
            ministers to reconsider such advice and the
            President shall act in accordance with the
            advice tendered after such reconsideration.

            2. Article 75 (a) The Prime Minister shall
            be appointed by the President and the other
            ministers shall be appointed by the President
            on the advice of the Prim e Mi nister; (b) The
            ministers shall hold office during the plea-
            su re of the President; and (c) The council of
            ministers shall be collectively responsible to
            the House of the People.

            3. Article 78 It sha 11 be the duty of the
            Prime Minister:
                (a) to communicate to the President all deci-
                sions of the council of ministers relating
                to the administration of the affairs of
                the Union and proposals for legislation;

                (b) to furnish such information relating to
                the ad ministration of the affairs of the
                Un ion and proposals for legislation as
                the President may call for; and
                
                (c) if the President so requires, to submit for
                the consideration of the council of min-
                isters any matter on wh ich a decision
                has been taken by a minister but which
                has not been considered by the council.

    CHIEF MINISTERS WHO BECAME PRIME MINISTERS
        Six people-Morarji Desai, Charan Singh, V.P.
        Singh, P.V. Narasimha Rao, H.D. Deve Gowda
        and Narendra Modi-became Prime Ministers
        after being Chief Ministers of their respec-
        tive States. Morarji Desai, Chief Minister of
        the erstwhile Bombay State during 1952-56.
        became the first non-Congress Prime Minister
        in March 1977. Charan Singh, who succeeded
        him, was the Chief Minister of the undi-
        vided Uttar Pradesh in 1967-1968 and again
        in 1970. V.P. Singh, also from U.P., became
        Prime Minister in the short lived National
        Front government (December 1989-November
        1990). P.V. Narasimha Rao, the first Prime
        Minister from South India, who held the post
        from 199.1-1996, was Chief Minister of Andhra
        Pradesh between 1971-1973. H.D. Deve Gowda
        was Chief Minister of Karnataka when he was
        chosen to lead the United Front government
        in June 1996 (The Hindu, April 6, 2009).

        Narendra M<:>di (BJP) was the Chief Minister
        of Gujarat when he became ~e Prime Minister
        in May 2014. He served as the Chief Minister
        of Gujarat for four times during 2001 to 2014.

    CARETAKER GOVERNMENT
        The Constitution of India does not contain
        any provision for a caretaker government.
        It is only a situational arrangement and a"
        fun ctional necessity.

        Meaning
            The following points clearly doing out the
            meaning of a caretaker government:
                1. The creation of a caretaker government
                after the dissolution of the popular
                chamber of the Parliament and its ter-
                mination with the induction of a new
                ministry after the general election is an
                essential feature of the parliamentary
                system of government in operation.
                Such a government is enjoined upon to
                hold free and fair poUs so that a new
                popular government comes into being
                    - J.C. Johari, Indian Government and Policies,
                    Vishal Publications, Volume II, Thirteenth Edition,
                    2001, p. 729.

                2. The term (caretaker government) has
                come to be used in common parlance to
                describe the status of a council of min-
                isters that has resigned on having lost
                the confidence of the Lok Sabha or oth-
                erwise but is asked by the President to
                continue till alternative arrangements
                are made. If an alternative govern-
                ment cannot be formed immediately
                and general elections have to be held,
                the outgoing council of ministers may
                have to hold charge till the conclu
                sion of elections and formation of new
                government.
                    - Subhash C. Kashyap, Our Constitution, National
                    Book 'frost, Fifth Edition, 2011, p. 203.


        Limited Role
            Unlike a regular government, a caretaker
            government is meant for only managing the
            routine activities of the government. Hence,
            it is not expected to make any S ignificant
            policy decisions or initiate new measures
            and schemes except those relating to national
            security or national interest.

            The following comments and observations
            highlight the limited role of a caretaker gov-
            ernment in the governance of the country:

                1. The Thrkunde Committee (1974-75) rec-
                ommended that a caretaker government
                should not: ( i) initiate and announce
                new policies, (ii) promise or start new
                projects, ( iii) grant allowances or loans,
                salary increases, and (iv) hold official
                functions attended by ministers.
                    - This committee on electoral refonns was appointed
                    in 1974 by Jayaprakash Na rayan (JP) during his
                    "'Ibtal Revolutionn movement. It was headed by
                    Justice Vithal Mahadeo Thrkunde. This unoffi cial
                    committee submitted its report in 1975. It was also
                    known as J P Committee.

                2. In August 1979, the then President N.
                Sanjeeva Reddy, while dissolving the Lok
                Sabha, issued a communique stMing that
                the Presiden t had co nsultations with the
                Prime Min ister a nd som e of his cabinet
                colleagues who assured tha t:
                    (i) Electio ns win be peaceful , free and
                    fa ir. The revisio n of the electora l
                    rol1 s will begin immediately a nd
                    the election tim e-table will com-
                    mence in November 1979 a nd wi ll
                    be completed by December 1979.

                    (ii) The Governmen t will not take deci-
                    sio ns du rin g thi s period whi ch
                    set nevI policies or in volve new
                    spen d ing of a sig ni fica n t order
                    or con stitu te m ea sures of adm in-
                    ist ra tive o r executive dec isio ns.
                    However, work of a n urge n t nature
                    in vo lvi n g the na tio n a l in te rest
                    will not be held up.

                3, The Calcutta High Court in a judgemen t
                delivered in December 1979 observed that
                there is no mention of a caretaker govern-
                men t as such in OU f constitution, but such
                an extraordinary situation calls for a care-
                taker governmen t and, therefore, the Prime
                Min ister and the Council of Mi nisters can,
                in such a situation only carryon day-to-
                day adm inistration in office, which are
                necessary for carrying on for the sake of
                making an alternative arrangem en t.

                4. The caretake r Prime Mi ni sters a re con-
                strai ned fo r two reasons: first, the nor-
                mal cha nnel of accounta bili ty through
                Parl iamen t does not exist; second, the
                government does not abuse its position
                to ga in electoral adva n tage.
                    - Rajeev Dhavan, Caretaker Despotism: Is the Presi-
                    dent Meddl ing? The Sunday Times of India, New
                    Delh i, August 15, 1999, p. 16.

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 20. 1 Articles Related to Prime Minister at a Glance
Article No. Subject Matter
74. 75. 77. 78. Council of Ministers to aid and advise President
Other provisions as to Ministers
Conduct of business of the Government of India
Duties of Prime Minister as respects the furnishing of information to the President, etc.
88. Rights of Ministers as respects the Houses
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------


CHAPTER 21: CENTRAL COUNCIL OF MINISTERS

    As the Constitution of India provides
    for a parliamentary system of govern·
    m en t modelled on the British pattern,
    the council of ministers headed by the prime
    minister is the real executive authority is our
    politico.administrative system .

    The principles of parliamentary system of
    government are not detailed in the Constitution,
    but two Articles (74 and 75) deal with them in
    a broad, sketchy and general manner. Article 74
    deals with the status of the council of ministers
    while Artic1e 75 deals with the appointment,
    tenure, responsibility, qualification, oath and
    salaries and alJowances of the ministers.

    CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
        Article 74-Council of Ministers to aid and advise President
            1. There shall be a Council of Ministers with
            the Prime Minister at the head to aid and
            advise the President who sha11, in the exer-
            cise ofhislher functions, act in accordance
            with such advice. However, the President
            may require the Council of Ministers to
            recon.sider such advice and the Presiden t
            shall act in accordance with the advice
            tendered after such reconsideration.
            
            2. The advice tendered by Ministers to the
            Presiden t shall not be inquired into in
            any court.

        Article 75-Other Provisions as to Ministers
            1. The Prime Minister shall be appo inted
            by the President and the other Ministers
            shall be appointed by the President on
            the advice of the Prime Minister.
            
            2. The total number of ministers, includ-
            ing the Prime Minister, in the Council
            of Ministers shall not exceed 15% of
            the total strength of the Lok Sabha.
            This provision was added by the 91 st
            Am endment Act of 2003.
            
            3. A m ember of either house of Parliament
            belon ging to an y political party who
            is disqualified on the ground of defec-
            tio n shall also be disqualified to be
            appointed as a minister. Th is p rovision
            was also added by the gIst Amendm en t
            Act of 2003.
            
            4. The ministers shall hold office during the
            pleasure of the President.
            
            5. The council of ministers shall be col1 ec-
            tively responsible to the Lok Sabha.
            
            6. The Presiden t shall administer the oaths
            of office and secrecy to a minister.
            
            7. A minister who is not a m ember of the
            Parliam ent (either house) for any period
            of six consecutive mon ths shall cease to
            be a minister.
            
            8. The salaries and allowances of ministers
            shall be determined by the Parliament.

        Article 77- Conduct of Business of the Government of India
            1. All executive action of the Government of
            India shall be expressed to be taken in
            the nam e of the President.

            2. Orders and other instruments m ade and
            executed in the name of the Presiden t
            shall be authenticated in such ma nner
            as may be specified in rules to be made
            by the President. Furthe r, the va lidity
            of an order or instrum e nt which is so
            authen ticated shall not he call ed in
            questio n o n the ground that it is not a n
            order or instrument made or executed
            by the President.
            
            3 . The Pres ide n t shall make rules for the
            more convenient transaction of the busi·
            ness of the Government of India, and for
            the allocation a mong Ministers of the
            sa id business.

        Article 78-Duties of Prime Minister

            It shall be the duty of the Prime Minister
                1. To communic. ,te to the President all deci-
                sions of the Council of Ministers relating
                to the administration of the affairs of the
                Union and proposals for legislation

                2 . To furnish such information relating to
                the administration of the affairs of the
                Union a nd p roposals for legislation as
                the Pres ide nt may call for

                3. If the President so requires, to submit
                for the co nsidera tion of the Cou ncil of
                Ministers a ny matter on whic h a dec i-
                sion has been taken by a Minister but
                which has not been conside red by the
                Council

        Article 88--Rights of Ministers as Respects the Houses

            Every minister sha ll have the r ight to speak
            and take part in the proceedings of ei ther
            House, a ny joint s itting of the Houses a nd
            any Committee of Parlia ment of which he/
            she may be named a me mber. But he/ she
            shall not be entitled to vote.

    NATURE OF ADVICE BY MINISTERS
        Article 74 provides for a council of ministers
        with the Prime Minister at the head to aid
        a nd advise the Presiden t in the exercise of
        his/her fu nc tions. The 42nd <l nd 44th Con-
        stitutiona l Amendment Acts have made the
        advice binding o n the Preside l1 t. 1 Further, the
        nature of advice tendered by ministers to the
        President ca nnot be enquired by any court.
        This provisio n e mphasises the intimate and
        the confidential relationship between the
        Preside nt < Ind the ministers.
            - ThisArticle was amended by the 42nd Constitutional
            Amendment ACt of 1976 to the effect that the
            presidentshall, in the exercise of his functions, act in
            accorda nce with the advice rendered by the coun(:i1
            of ministers. The 44th Constitutional Amendment
            A ct of 1 978 fu rther added a proviso to this article
            to the effect that the president may require the
            counci l of ministers to reconsider such advice a nd
            the president shall act in accordance with the advice
            tendered after such reconsideration.

        In U.N. R. Rao case (U.N.R. Rao vs. Indira Gandhi, 1971), the Supre m e
        Court held that "eve n after the dissolution of
        the Lok Sabha, the council of mi n iste rs does
        not cease to h o ld office. Article 74 is m a n-
        datory and, therefore, the President ca nnot
        exercise the executive powe r without the a id
        a nd advise of the council of ministers. Any
        exercise of executive power without the aid
        a nd advice will be unconstitutional as being
        viola ti ve o f Article 74~. Aga in in Shamsher
        Singh case (Shamsher Singh vs. State of Punjab, 1974), the court h eld that ~wherever
        the Constitution requires the satisfa ction
        of the Pres ide nt, the satisfaction is not the
        perso nal satisfaction of the Preside nt but it
        is the satisfaction of the council of ministers
        with whose a id a nd on whose advice the Presi-
        dent exercises his/ her powers and functions.

    APPOINTMENT OF MINISTERS
        The Prime Minister is appointed by the Presi·
        dent, while the other ministers <I re appointed
        by the President on the advice of the Prime
        Mi nister. This mea ns that th e Preside nt can
        appoint only those pe rsons as ministers who
        a re recommended by the Prime minister.

        Usually, the me mbers of Parliament, either
        Lok Sabha or Rajya Sabha, are a ppointed as min·
        isters. A person who is not a member of either
        House of Pa rlia ment can a lso be appointed
        as a minister. But, within six months, he/she
        must become a member (either by election or
        by nomination) of either House of Parliament,
        otherwise, he/ she ceases to be a minister.

        A minister who is a member of one House
        of Parliament has the right to speak and to
        take part in the proceedings of the other
        House also, but he/ she can vote only in the
        House of which he/ she is a member.

    OATH AND SALARY OF MINISTERS
        Before a minister enters upon his/her office,
        the President administers to him/her the
        oaths of office and secrecy. In his/ her oath
        of office, the minister swears:
            1. to bear true faith and allegiance to the
            Constitution of India,
            
            2. to uphold the sovereignty and integrity
            of India,
            
            3. to faithfully and conscientiously dis-
            charge the duties of his/ her office, and
            
            4. to do right to all manner of people in
            accordance with the Constitution and
            the law, without fear or favour, affection
            or ill will.

        In his/ her oath of secrecy, the minis-
        ter swears that he/ she will not directly or
        indirectly communicate or reveal to any
        person(s) any matter that is brought under
        his/ her consideration or becomes known to
        him/her as a Union minister except as may
        be required for the due discharge of his/ her
        duties as such minister.

        In 1990, the oath by Devi Lal as deputy
        prime minister was challenged as being
        unconstitutional as the Constitution provides
        only for the Prime Minister and ministers.
        The Supreme Court upheld the oath as valid
        and stated that describing a person as Deputy
        Prime Minister is descriptive only and such
        description does not confer on him/ her any
        powers of Prime Minister. It ruled that the
        description of a minister as Deputy Prime
        Minister or any other type of minister such as
        minister of state or deputy minister of which
        there is no mention in the Constitution does
        not vitiate the oath taken by him/ her so long
        as the substantive part of the oath is correct.

        The salaries and allowances of ministers
        are determined by Parliament from time to
        time. A minister gets the salary and allow-
        ances that are payable to a member of Parlia-
        ment. Additionally, he/ she gets a sumptuary
        allowance (according to his/ her rank), free
        accommodation, travelling allowance, medi-
        cal facilities, etc. In 2001, the sumptuary
        allowance for the prime minister was raised
        from 1,SOO to 3,OOO per month, for a cabinet
        minister from 1,000 to 2,000 per month, for
        a minister of state from SOO to 1,OOO per
        month and for a deputy minister from 300
        to 600 per month.
            -The Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 1952,
            has been passed for this purpose.
            - The Salaries and Allowances of Ministers (Amend-
            ment) Act, 2001.

    RESPONSIBILITY OF MINISTERS
        Collective Responsibility
            The fundamental prinCiple underlying the
            working of parliamentary system of govern-
            ment is the principle of collective responsibil-
            ity. Article 75 clearly states that the council of
            ministers is collectively responsible to the Lok
            Sabha. This means that all the ministers own
            joint responsibility to the Lok Sabha for all
            their acts of om mission and commission. They
            work as a team and swim or sink together.
            When the Lok Sabha passes a no-confidence
            motion against the council of ministers, all
            the ministers have to resign including those
            ministers who are from the Rajya Sabha.3
            Alternatively, the council of ministers can
            advise the President to dissolve the Lok Sabha
            on the ground that the House does not repre-
            sent the views of the electorate faithfully and
            call for fresh elections. The President may not
            oblige the council of ministers that has lost the
            confidence of the Lok Sabha.
                - Each minister need not resign separately; the resig-
                nation of the prime minister amounts to the resig-
                nation of the entire council of ministers.

            The principle of collective responsibility
            a lso mea ns that the Cabi net decis ions bind
            a ll cabinet ministers (a nd other ministers)
            even if they differed in the ca binet meeti ng.
            It is the duty of every m inister to sta nd by
            ca bi net decisions and support them both
            within a nd outside the Parliament. If any
            minister disagrees with a cabinet decision
            and is not prepared to defend it, he/ she
            must resign. Severa l ministers have resigned
            in the past owi ng to theiT differences with
            the cabinet. For exa mple, Dr. B.R. Ambed kar
            resigned because of his differences with his
            colleagues on the Hindu Code Bill in 1953.
            C. D. Deshmu kh resigned due to his d iffer-
            ences on the policy of reorgan isa tion of
            states. Arif Moha mmed resigned due to his
            opposition to the Muslim Women (Protection
            of Rights o n Divorce) Act, 1986.

        Individual Responsibility
            Article 75 a lso conta in s the principle of
            indi vidual responsibility. It states that the
            m in isters hold office during the pleasure
            of t he President, whi ch m eans that the
            Presiden t can re move a minister eve n at a
            t ime when the cou nci l of ministers enjoys
            the confidence of the Lok Sabha. However, the
            President removes a ministe r onl y 011 the
            advice of the Prime Mini ster. In case of
            a difference of opinion or dissatisfactio n
            with the performan ce of a mini ster, the
            Prime Minister ca n ask him / her to resign
            oradvice the President to dismiss him/ her.
            By exercising this power, the Prime Mi nister
            can ensure the rea lisation of the rule of col-
            lective respons ibil ity. in thiscon text, Dr. B.R.
            Am bcdka r observed:
                "Collective responsibility can be achieved
                only through the instrumentality of the
                Prime Mi n ister. Therefore, unless a nd
                until we create that office a nd endow that
                office with statutory authority to nomi-
                nate and dismiss ministers, there can be
                no collective responsibility."
                    - Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume VIII , p. 1160.

        No Legal Responsibility
            In Britain, every order of the King tor any
            public act is countersigned by a minister. If the
            order is in violation of <lny law, the minister
            wo uld be held responsible and would be liable
            in the court. The lega ll y accepted phrase in
            Britain is, "The king ca n do no wrong." Hence,
            he/ she ca nnot be sued in any court.

            in India, on the other hand, there is no
            provision in the Constitution for the system
            of lega l responsibility of a minister. It is not
            req uired that an order of the Preside nt for
            a public act should be countersigned by a
            minister. Moreover, the courts are barred from
            enquiring into the nature of advice rendered
            by the ministers to the President.

    COMPOSITION OF THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS
        The council of min isters consists of three cat-
        egories of ministers, namely, cabinet minis-
        te rs, ministers of state, and deputy ministers.
        The difference between them lies in their
        respective ranks, emolumen ts, and political
        importa nce. At the top of all these m ini sters
        stands the Prime Minister-the supreme gov-
        erning authority of the cou ntry.

        At times, the cou ncil of ministers may also
        include a deputy prime minister. The deputy
        prime ministers are appointed mostly for
        political reasons.

        The cabi net m inisters head the impor-
        tant ministries of the Centra l govern ment
        like home, defence, finance, externa l affai rs
        an d so fo rth . Theyaremcmbersofthecabi-
        net,attenditsmeetings and play an im portant
        role in deciding policies. Thus, their respon-
        sibilities extend over the entire gamu t of
        Central government.

        The ministers of state can either be given
        independent charge of min istries/ departments
        or can be attached to cabinet ministers. In
        case of attach ment, they may e ither be given
        the charge of departments of the ministries
        headed by the cabinet ministers or allotted
        specific items of work related to the minis-
        tries headed by cab inet ministers. In both the
        ases, they work under the supervIsion and
        guida nce as well as under the overall charge
        and responsibility of the cabinet ministers. In
        case of independent charge, they perform the
        same functions and exercise the same powers
        in relation to their mini st ri es/de partm e nt~ as
        cabinet ministers do. However, they are not
        members of the cabinet and do not attend
        the cabinet 'meetings unless specially invited
        when something related to their' ministries!
        departmen ts are considered by the cabinet.

        Next in rank are the deputy , ministers.
        They are not given independent charge of
        ministries/ departments. They are attached
        to the cabinet ministers or ,ministers of state
        and assist them in their administrative, politi.
        cal, and parliamentary duties, They are not
        members of the cabinet and do not attend
        cabinet meetings.

        It must also b ~ mentioned here that there
        is one more category of ministers, caned par-
        liamentary secretaries, But, they are not the
        members of the council of ministers, They
        are appointed by the Prime Minister and not
        by the PresidentS, They have no department
        under their control. They are attached to the
        sen ior min isters and assist them in the dis-
        charge of their parliamentary du ties.
            - Study Repon on Parliamentary Secretary, Minislry
            of Parliamentary Affairs, 1997, p. 3 and p. 9,

    COUNCIL OF MINISTERS VSCABINET
        The words 'cou ncil of ministers' and 'cabinet'
        are often used intercha ngeably though there
        is a defin ite d istinction between them. They
        differ from each other in respects of co mpo-
        sition , functions, and role. These differences
        arc shown in Thble 21.1.

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 21. 1 Distinction Between Council of Ministers and Cabinet CounCIl of mInisters Cabmet
I' It is a wider body
2. It Includes all the three categories of ministers, that
is, cabinet ministers, ministers of state, and deputy
~ _ ~. I~ste rs . • .a. -
3. It does not meet, as a body, to transact government
business. It has no collective functions.
I ,
I
4. It Is vested with all powers but In theory.
- ----
.
I s Its functions are determined by the cabinel
6. It Implements the decisions taken by the cabinet.
17. It is a constitutional body, dealt in detail by the Articles
I 74 and 75 of the Constitution. Its size and classification
I are, however, not mentioned in the Constitution. Its size
is determined by the prime minister according to the
exigencies of the time and requirements of the situation.
But, as provided by the 9 1 st Constitutional Amendment
Act of 2003, its maximum size should not exceed 15%
of the total strength of the l ok Sabha. Its classification
into a three-tier body Is based on the conventions of
parliamentary government as developed in Britain. It has,
however, got a legislative sanction. Thus, the Salaries and
Allowances of Ministers Act of 1952 defines a 'minister'
as a 'member of the council of ministers, by whatever
name called, and includes a deputy minister'.
8. It Is collectively responsible to the lower House of the
Parliament.
1 It is a smaller body
2. It Includes the cabinet ministers only. Thus, It is a
part of the council of ministers.
-
3. It meets, as a body, frequently and usually once In
a week to deliberate and take decisions regarding
the transaction of government business. Thus, it
has collective functions.
4. It exercises. In practice, the powers of the council
o~ ministers and thus, acts for the latter .
S. It directs the council of ministers by taking policy
decisions which are binding on all ministers.
6. It supervises the implementation of its decisions by
the council of ministers.
7. 11 was Inserted in Article 352 of the Constitution in
1978 by the 44th Constitutional Amendment Act.
Thus, it did not find a place in the original text of
the Constitution. Now also, Article 352 only defines
the cabinet saying that it is 'the council consisting
of the prime minister and other ministers of cabinet
rank apPOinted under Article 75' and does not
describe its powers and functions. In other words,
11s role In our politico-administrative system is
based on the conventions of parliamentary govern-
ment as developed in Britain.
8. It enforces the collective responSibility of the coun-
cil of ministers to the l ower House of Parliament.
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------


    ROLE OF CABINET
        1. It is the h ighest decision-making authority
        in ou r politico-admi nistrative system.
        2. It is the chief policy formu lating body of
        the Cen tral government.
        3. It is the suprem e executive authority of
        the Cen tral government.
        4. It is ch ief coo rdi n ator of Ce n tra l
        adm i n istra tion.
        5. It is a n advisory body to the Presiden t and
        its advice is bindi ng on him / her.
        6. It is the chi ef crisis manager and thus
        deals with al1 emergency situations.
        7. It deals wi th all major legislative and
        financia l matters.
        8. It exercises control over higher appoint-
        ments like constitutional authorities and
        senior secretariat ad ministrators.
        9. It deals with all foreign policies and for-
        eign affairs.

    ROLE DESCRIPTIONS
        The va ri olls commen ts made by the emi nent
        political scientists and constitutio nal expe rts
        on the role of cabinet in Bri tai n holds good
        in the Indian context a lso. These are m en-
        t ioned below.
            Ramsay Muir "The Cabinet is the steering
            wheel of the shi p of the state."

            Lowell "The Cabi net is the keystone o f the
            political arch".

            Sir John Marriott "The Cabinet is the pivot
            around wh ich the whole political mach inery
            revolves".

            Gladstone "The Cabinet is the solar orb
            aroll nd wh ich the other bod ies revolve".
            
            Barker "The Cabinet is the magnet of policy".
            
            Bagehot "The Cabinet is a hyphen that joins,
            the buckle that bi nds the executive and legis-
            lative departmen ts together".
            
            Sir Ivor Jennings "The Cabinet is the core of
            the British Constitutiona l System. It provides
            un ity to the Brit ish system of Govern men t".
            
            L.S. Amery "The Cabinet is the centra l
            d irecting instrumen t of Govern men t".

        The position of the Cabinet in the British
        Govern men t has becomc so strong that Ra m-
        say Muir referred to it as the 'Dictatorsh ip of
        the Cabinet'. In hi s book 'How Britain is Gov-
        erned', he writes ~A body wh ich wields such
        powers as these may fai rl y be 'described as
        'om n ipotent' in theory, howeve r, incapab le
        it may be of using its om ni potence. Its posi-
        tion, whenever it com ma nds a majority, is a
        dictatorship only qualified by pU blicity. This
        dictatorship is far more absolu te that it was
        two generations ago". The same descriptio n
        holds good in the India n contex t too.

    KITCHEN CABINET
        The cabinct, a sm all body consisting of the
        prime minister as its head and the cabinet m in-
        isters, is the highest decision-making body in
        the formal sense. However, a still smaller body
        called the 'Inner cabinet' or 'Kitchen Cabinet'
        has become the real centre of power. This infor·
        mal body consists of the Prime Minister and
        a few influential colleagues in who111 he/ she
        has faith and with whom he/ she can discuss
        every problem . It advises the prime minister
        on importan t politica l a nd admi n istra tive
        issues and assists him/ her in making crucia l
        decisions. It is composed of not on ly cabinet
        m inisters but also outsiders like friends and
        fa mily members ofthe prime minister.

        Every prime minister in India has had his/
        her 'Inner Cabinet'-a circle within a circle.
        During the era of Indira Gandhi, the 'Inner
        Cabinet' which came to be called the 'Kitchen
        Cabinet' was particularly powerful.

        The prime ministers have resorted to the
        device of 'inner cabinet' (extra-constitutional
        body) due to its merits, namely:
            1. It being a small unit, is much more effi·
            cient decision-making body than a large
            cabinet.
            2. It can meet more often and deal with
            business much more expeditiously than
            the large cabinet.
            3. It helps the Prime Minister in main·
            taining secrecy in making decisions on
            important political issues.

        However, it has many demerits also. 
            - Avasthi and Avasthi, Indian Administration, Laksmi
            Narain Agarwal, First Edition, 1993, p. 79.
        Thus
            1. It reduces the authority and status of the
            cabinet as the highest decision-making
            body.
            
            2. It circumvents the legal process by
            al10wing outside persons to play an
            influential role in the government
            functioning.

        The phenomenon of 'kitchen cabinet'
        (where decisions are cooked and placed
        before the cabinet for formal approval) is
        not unique to India. It also exists in USA and
        Britain and is quite powerful in influencing
        government decisions there.

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 21.2 Articles Related to Central Council of Ministers at a Glance
Article No Subject Matter
74.
75.
77. 78. 88. Council of Ministers to aid and advise President
Other provisions as to Ministers
Conduct of business of the Government of India
Duties of Prime Minister as respects the furnishing of information to the President, etc.
Rights of Ministers as respects the Houses
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------


CHAPTER 22: CABINET COMMITTEES

    The Cabinet works through various com-
    mittees. These comm ittees are called
    as Cabinet Committees. The features,
    list a nd functions of these committees are
    explained below.

    FEATURES OF CABINET COMMITTEES
        The fol lowing are the featu res of Cabinet
        Com mittees:
            1. They are extra-constitutional in emergence.
            In other words, they are not mentioned in
            the Constitution. However, the Rules of
            Business provide for their establishment.

            2. They arc of two types-standing and ad
            hoc. The former are of a permanent
            nature while the latter are of a tempo-
            rary nature. The ad 110C committees are
            constituted from time to time to deal
            with special problems. T h ey arc dis-
            banded after their task is completed.
                - For exa mple, the Eme rgency Committee was set-up
                in 1962 after the Chinese invasion
            
            3. They are set up by the Prime Minister
            accordi ng to the exigencies of the time
            and requirements of the situa tion.
            Hen ce, their number, nomenclature, and
            composition varies from time to time.
            
            4. Their membersh ip varies fro m one com-
            mittee to anoth er committee. They
            usually include only Cabinet Ministers.
            Someti mes, the non-cabi net min isters
            can also be appointed as their members.
            Further, the non-cabinet m in isters can
            also attend the meetings of the Cabinet
            Committees as special invitees.

            5 . They n ot on ly include the Min isters in
            charge of subjects covered by them but
            also include other senior Ministers.
            
            6. They are mostly headed by the Prime
            Min ister. Some times other senior Cabinet
            Ministers also acts as the ir Chairman.
            But, in case the Prime Min ister is a mem-
            ber of a comm ittee, helshe invariably
            presides over it.
            
            7. They n ot on ly sort out issues and for-
            mulate proposals for the consideration
            of the Cabinet, but also take decisions.
            However, the Cabin et can review their
            decisions.
            
            8. They are an orga nisational device to
            reduce the enormous workload of the
            Cabi net. They a lso facilitate in-depth
            exa mination of policy issues and effec-
            tive coordination. They are based on
            the principles o f di vision of labour and
            effective delegation.

    LIST OF CABINET COMMITTEES
        At present, the following 8 Cabinet Comm it-
        tees are functional:
            1. Cabi net Comm ittee on Political Affa irs
            
            2. Cabinet Com mittee o n Economic Affairs
            
            3. Appointments Committee of the Cabinet
            
            4. Cabinet Com mittee on Parl iamentary
            Affa irs
            
            5. Cabi net Committee on Security
            
            6. Cabinet Committee on Accom modation
            
            7. Cab inet Committee on Investment and
            Growth
            
            8. Cabinet Committee on Employment and
            Skill Develop men t

    FUNCTIONS OF CABINET COMMITTEES
        The following are the functions of the cabinet
        committees:
            1. The Cabinet Committee on Political
            Affairs deals with all policy matters per·
            taining to domestic and foreign affairs.
            
            2. The Cabinet Committee on Economic
            Affairs directs and coordinates the govern-
            mental activities in the economic sphere.
            
            3. The Appointments Committee of the
            Cabinet decides all higher level appoint-
            ments in the Central Secretariat, Public
            Enterprises, Banks and Financial
            Institutions.
            
            4. The Cabinet Committee on Parliamentary
            Affairs looks after the , progress of gov-
            ernment business in the Parliament.
            
            5. The Cabinet Committee on Security deals
            \¥lth all issues relating to defence, law
            'and order, internal security and atomic
            energy· .
            
            6. The Cabinet Committee on Accomodation
            deals with all issues regarding the allot-
            ment of government accomodatio'n to
            the Memb~rs of Parliament, central
            government employees, other persons
            and various organisations,
            
            7. The Cabinet Committee on Investment
            a'nd Growth' deals with all policy matters
            'aimed at accelerating capital inflows,
            export promotion, import substitution
            and improving ease of doing business,
            
            8. The Cabinet Committee on Employment
            and Skill Development deals with al1
            'issues related to developing skills,
            enhancing employability of work-
            force and increasing women workforce
            participation.

        Of al1 the Cabiriet Committees, the most
        powetful is the Political' Affairs' Committee,
        often described as a ~Super-Cabinet",

    GROUPS OF MINISTERS
        In addition to cabinet committees, several
        Groups of Ministers (GoMs) are constituted
        to look into different issues/subjects, Some of
        these GoMs are empowered to take decisions
        on behalf of the Cabinet whereas the others
        make recommendations to the Cabinet.
            - Second Administrative Reforms Commission, Govern-
            ment of India, Report on. Organizational Structure of
            Government of India, 2009, p. 136. This commission
            was headed by Veerappa MoHy, a senior Congress
            leader and former Karnataka Chief Minister. .

        The institution of GoMs has become a
        viable arid effective instrument of coordina-
        tion among the 'ministries. These are ad hoc
        bodies formed to give recommendations to
        the cabinet on certain emergent issues and
        critical problem areas, Ministers heading the
        concerned ministries are inducted into the
        relevant GoMs and when the advice is crystal-
        lised they are disbanded.
            - Ramesh K. Arora and Rajni Goyal, Indian Public
            Admil1istration, New Age International Publishers,
            Third Edition, 2013, pp. 238-239.

        The Second Administrative Reforms Com-
        mission of India (2005-2009) made the fol-
        lowing observations and recommendations
        with respect to the working of the GoMs(Second Administrative Reforms Commission,
            Government of Ind. ia, Report on Organisational
            Structure of Government of India, 2009, pp. 136-137
            and 140):
            
            1. The Commission observed that the con-
            stitution of a large number of GoMs has
            resulted in many GoMs not being able
            to meet regularly to complete their work
            thus leading to significant delays on
            many major issues.

            2. The Commission felt that more selective
            use of the institution of GoMs would
            perhaps lead to more effective coordination
            particularly if they are empow-
            ered to arrive at a .decision on behalf
            of the Cabinet with time limits that
            are prescribed for completing the work
            entrusted to them.
            
            3. The Commission recommended that there
            is need to ensure that the existing coor-
            dination mechanism of GoMs function
            effectively and helps in early resolution
            of issues, Selective, but effective use of
            GoMs with clear mandate and prescribed
            time limits would be helpful.


CHAPTER 23: PARLIAMENT

    The Parliament is the legislative organ
    of the Union government. It occupies
    a pre-eminent and central position
    in the Indian democratic political system
    due to adoption of the parliamentary form
    of government, also known as 'Westminster'
    model of government.
        - Westminster is a place in London where the British
        Parliament is located. It is often used as a symbol of
        the British Parlia ment.

    Articles 79 to 122 in Part V of the Consti-
    tution deal with the organisation, composi-
    tion, duration, officers, procedures, privileges,
    powers and so on of the Parliament.

    ORGANISATION OF PARLIAMENT
        Under the Constitution, the Parliament of
        India consists of three parts viz, the Presi-
        dent, the Council of States and the House of
        the People. In 1954, the Hindi names 'Rajya
        Sabha' and 'Lok Sabha' were adopted by the
        Council of States and the House of People
        respectively. The Rajya Sabha is the Upper
        House (Second Chamber or House of Elders)
        and the Lok Sabha is the Lower House (First
        Chamber or Popular House). The former rep-
        resents the states and union territories of the
        Indian Union, while the latter represents the
        people of India as a whole.

        Though the President of India is not a mem-
        ber of either House of Parliament and does not
        sit in the Parliament to attend its meetings, he/
        she is an integral part of the Parliament. A bill
        passed by both the Houses of Parliament cannot
        become law without the President's assent. He/
        she also performs certain functions relating to
        the proceedings of the Parliament, for example,
        he/ she summons and pro-rogues both the
        Houses, dissolves the Lok Sabha, addresses both
        the Houses, issues ordinances when they are
        not in session, and so on.

        In this respect, the framers of the Indian
        Constitution relied on the British pattern
        rather than the American pattern. In Britain,
        the Parliament consists of the Crown (King
        or Queen), the House of Lords (Upper House)
        and the House of Commons (Lower House).
        By contrast, the American President is not
        an integral part of the legislature. In USA,
        the legislature, which is known as Congress,
        consists of the Senate (Upper House) and the
        House of Representatives (Lower House).

        The parliamentary form of government
        emphasises on the interdependence between
        the legislative and executive organs. Hence,
        we have the 'President-in-Parliament' like
        the 'Crown-in-Parliament' in Britain. The
        Presidential form of government, on the other
        hand, lays stress on the separation of legisla-
        tive and executive organs. Hence, the Ameri-
        can President is not regarded as a constituent
        part of the Congress.

    COMPOSITION OF THE TWO HOUSES
        Composition of Rajya Sabha
            The maximum strength of the Rajya Sabha is
            fixed at 250, out of which, 238 are to be the
            representatives of the st;'1tes and union territo-
            ries (elected indirectly) and 12 are nominated
            by the President.

            At present, the Rajya Sabha has 245 mem-
            bers. Of these, 225 members represent the
            states, 8 members represent the union terri-
            tories and 12 members are nominated by the
            President.

            The Fourth Schedule of the Constitution
            deals with the allocation of seats in the Rajya
            Sabha to the states and union territories.

            1. Representation of States The representa-
            tives of states in the Rajya Sabha are elected
            by the elected members of state legislative
            assemblies. The election is held in accordance
            with the system of proportional representa-
            tion by means of the single transferable vote.
            The seats are allotted to the states in the Rajya
            Sabha on the basis of population. Hence, the
            number of representatives varies from state
            to state. For example, Uttar Pradesh has 31
            members while Tripura has 1 member only.
            However, in USA, all states are given equal
            representation in the Senate irrespective of
            their population. USA has 50 states and the
            Senate has 100 members-2 from each state.

            2. Representation of Union Territories The
            representatives of each union territory in the
            Rajya Sabha are indirectly elected by mem-
            bers of an electoral college specially consti-
            tuted for the purpose. This election is also
            held in accordance with the system of propor-
            tional representation by means of the single
            transferable vote. Out of the eight union ter-
            ritories, only three (Delhi, Puducherry and
            Jammu & Kashmir) have representation in
            Rajya Sabha. The populations of other five
            union territories are too small to have any
            representative in the Rajya Sabha.

            3. Nominated Members The President
            nominates 12 members to the Rajya Sabha
            from people who have special knowledge or
            practical experience in art, literature, sci-
            ence and social service. The rationale behind
            this principle of nomination is to provide
            eminent persons a place in the Rajya Sabha
            without going through the process of election.
            It should be noted here that the American
            Senate has no nominated members.


        Composition of Lok Sabha
            The maximum strength of the Lok Sabha is
            fixed at 550. Out of this, 530 members are
            to be the representatives of the states and
            20 members are to be the representatives of
            the union territories.

            At present, the Lok Sabha has 543 mem-
            bers. Of these, 524 members represent the
            states and 19 members represent the union
            territories.

            1. Representation of States The representa-
            tives of states in the Lok Sabha are directly
            elected by the people from the territorial con-
            stituencies in the states. The election is based
            on the principle of universal adult franchise.
            Every Indian citizen who is above 18 years
            of age and who is n ot disqualified under the
            provisions of the Constitution or any law is
            eligible to vote at such election. The voting
            age was reduced from 21 to 18 years by the
            61st Constitutional Amendment Act, 1988.
            
            2. Representation of Union Territories The
            Constitution has empowered the Parliament
            to prescribe the manner of choosing the rep-
            resentatives of the union territories in the
            Lok Sabha. Accordingly, the Parliament has
            enacted the Union Thrritories (Direct Election
            to the House ofthe People) Act, 1965, by which
            the members of Lok Sabha from the union
            territories are also chosen by direct election.
            
            3. Nominated Members Before 2020, the
            President nominated two members from the
            AnglO-Indian community to the Lok Sabha,
            if the community was not adequately repre-
            sented. Originally, this provision was to oper-
            ate for ten years (Le., upto 1960) only. Later,
            this duration has been extended continu-
            ously since then by ten years each time. The
            last extension upto 2020 was made by the
            95th Amendment Act, 2009. But, the 104th
            Amendment Act, 2019, has not extended
            further the operation of thi s provision. In
            other words, the Amendment discontinued
            this provision of specia l representatio n of
            the Anglo-Ind ian co mm u n ity in the Lok
            Sabha by nomina t ion. Conseque ntly, this
            provision ceased to have effect on the 25th
            January, 2020.
                - An Anglo-Indian is a person whose father or any
                of whose other male progenitors in the male line
                is or was of European descent but who is domiciled
                within the territory of India and is or was born
                within such territory of parents habitually resident
                therein and not merely established there for tem-
                porary purposes.

            The a llocation of seats in Parliament (both
            the R.'1jya Sabha and the Lok Sabha) for states
            and union territories is given in Table 23.5.

    SYSTEM OF ELECTIONS TO LOKSABHA
        The various aspects related to the system of
        e lections to the Lok Sabha arc as follows:
            Territorial Constituencies
                For the purpose of holding direct e lections
                to the Lok Sabha, each state is di vided into
                territorial constitue ncies. In this respect,
                the Constitut ion makes the fo ll owing two
                provisions:
                    1. Each state is allotted a number of seats
                    in the Lok Sabha in such a manner that
                    the ratio between that number and its
                    population is the S.1111e for all states.
                    Th is provision does not apply to a state
                    having a population of less than six
                    millions.
                    
                    2. Each state is divided into territoria l con-
                    stituencies in such a manner that the
                    ratio between the population of each
                    constituency and the number of seats
                    a llotted to it is the same th roughout the
                    state.

                In brief, the Const itut ion ensures that
                there is uniformity of representation in two
                respects: (a) between the different states, and
                (b) between the different co nst itue ncies in
                the sa me state.

                The expression ' population ' means the
                population as ascertained at the preced ing
                census of which the rel eva nt figures have
                been published.

            Readjustment after each Census
                After every census, a readjustment is to be
                made in (a) allocation of seats in the Lok
                Sabha to the states, and (b) d ivision of each
                state into territoria l constituencies. Parlia-
                ment is empowered to determine the author-
                ity and the ma nner in which it is to be made.
                Accordingly, the Parliament has enacted the
                Delimitation COlllmission Acts in 1952, 1962,
                1972 and 2002 for this purpose.

                The 42nd Amendmc nt Act of 1976 froze
                the allocation of seats in the Lok Sabha to
                the st<l tes and the division of each state into
                territorial constituenc ies till the yea r 2000
                at the 1971 level. This ban on readjustment
                was extended for a nother 25 yea rs (ie, upto
                year 2026) by thc 84th Amendment Act of
                2001 , with the sa me obj ective of encouraging
                population lim iting measures.

                The 84th Amendment Act of 2001 also
                empowered the government to undertake
                readjustment and rationa lisation of territorial
                constituencies in the states o n the basis of
                the population figu res of 1991 census. Later,
                the 87th Amendment Act of 2003 provided
                for the delim itatio n of constituencies o n the
                basis of 2001 census and not 1991 census.
                However, this can be done without altering
                the number of scats allotted to each state in
                the Lok Sabha.

        Reservation of Seats for SCs and STs
            Though the Constitution has <tba ndoned the
            system of comm una l representation, it pro-
            vides for the reservation of seats for scheduled
            castes and schedu led tribes in the Lok Sabha
            o n the basis of population ratios.
                - This means that the number of Lok Sabha scats re-
                served in a state or union territory for such castes
                and tribes is to bear the sa me proportion to the
                total numbe r of seats allotted to that state o r union
                territory in the Lok Sabha as the population of such
                C<lstes and tribes in the co nce rned st<lte or union
                territory bears lO the tota l population of state or
                union territory.

            Originally, this reservation was to oper-
            ate for ten years (ie, up to 1960), but it has
            been extended continuously since then by
            10 years each time. Now, under the 104th
            Amendment Act of 2019, this reservation is
            to last until 2030.

            Though seats are reserved for scheduled
            castes and scheduled tribes, they are elected by
            all the voters in a constituency, without any
            separate electorate. A member of scheduled
            castes and scheduled tribes is also not debarred
            from contesting a general (non-reserved) seat.

            The 84th Amendment Act of 2001 provided
            for refixing of the reserved seats on the basis
            of the population figures of 1991 census as
            applied to rationalisation of the general seats.
            Later, the 87th Amendment Act of 2003 pro-
            vided for the refixing of the reserved seats on
            the basis of 2001 census and not 1991 census.

            The state-wise reservation of seats for
            SCs and S15 in the Lok Sabha is given in
            Thble 23.5.

        First-Past-The-Post System
            Though the Constitution has adopted the
            system of proportional representation in the
            case of Rajya Sabha, it has not preferred the
            same system in the case of Lok Sabha. Instead,
            it has adopted the system of territorial repre-
            sentatio. n (First-pasHhe-post system) for the
            election of members to the Lok Sabha.

            Under territorial representation, every
            member of the legislature represents a geo-
            graphical area known as a constituency. From
            each constituency, only one representative is
            elected. Hence such a constituency is known
            as single-member constituency. In this sys-
            tem, a candidate who secures majority of
            votes is declared elected. This simple majority
            system of representation does not represent
            the whole electorate. In other words, it does
            not secure due representation to minorities
            (small groups).

            The system of proportional representa-
            tion aims at removing the defects of territo-
            rial representation. Under this system, all
            sections of the people get representation in
            proportion to their number. Even the smallest
            section of the population gets its due share of
            representation in the legislature.
            
            There are two kinds of proportional rep-
            resentation, namely, single transferable vote
            system and list system. In India, the first kind
            is adopted for the election of members to the
            Rajya Sabha and state legislative council and for
            electing the President and the Vice-President.

            Though some members of the Constituent
            Assembly had advocated the system of pro-
            portional representation for the election of
            members to the Lok Sabha, the Constitution
            has not adopted the system, due to tw·o reasons,
                1. Difficulty for the voters to understand
                the system (which is complicated) due
                to low literacy scale in the' country,
                2. Unsuitability to the parliamentary gov-
                ernment due to the tendency of the sys-
                tem to multiply political parties leading
                to instability in government.

            Additionally, the system of proportional
            representation has the following aemerits:
                1. It is highly expensive.
                
                2. It does not give any scope for organising
                by-elections.
                
                3. It eliminates intimate contacts between
                voters and representatives.
                
                4. It promotes minority thinking and group
                interests.
                
                5. It increases the significance of party sys-
                tem and decreases that of voter.

    DURATION OF TWO HOUSES
        Duration of Rajya Sabha
            The Rajya Sabha (first constituted in 1952)
            is a continuing chamber, that is, it is a per-
            manent body and not subject to dissolution.
            However, one-third of its members retire every
            second year. Their seats are fi1led up by fresh
            elections and Presidential nominations at
            the beginning of every third year. The retir-
            ing members are eligible for re-election and
            renomination any number of times. 

            The Constitution has not fixed the tenn of
            office of members of the Rajya Sabha and left it
            to the Parliament Accordingly, the Parliament
            in the Representation of the People Act (1951)
            provided that the term of office of a member
            of the Rajya Sabha shall be six years. The act
            also empowered the President of India to curtc'lil
            the term of members chosen in the first Rajya
            Sabha. In the first batch, it was decided by lot-
            tery as to who should retire. Further, the act also
            authorised the President to make provisions to
            govern the order of retirement of the members
            of the Rajya Sabha.
                - A minister in the Union or state government is not
                considered as holding the office of profit. Also, the
                Parliament can declare that a particular office of
                profit will not disqualify its holder from pnrlia-
                mentary membership.

        Duration of Lok Sabha
            Unlike the Rajya Sabha, the Lok Sabha is not
            1I continuing chamber. Its normal tenn is five
            years from the date of its first meeting after the
            general elections, after which it automatically
            dissolves. However, the President is authorised
            to dissolve the Lok Sabha at any time even
            before the completion of five years and this
            cannot be challenged in a court of law.

            Further, the term of the Lok Sabha can be
            extended during the period of national emer-
            gency by a law of Parliament for one year at
            a timeS for any length of time. However, this
            extension cannot continue beyond a period
            of six months after the emergency has ceased
            to operate.

            The durations ofthe Lok Sabha (from first
            to present) are mentioned in Thble 23.6.

    MEMBERSHIP OF PARLIAMENT 
        Qualifications
            The Constitution lays down the following
            qualifications for a person to be chosen a
            member of the Parliament:
                1. He/ she must be a ci tizen of India.
                
                2. He/ she must make and subscribe to an
                oath or affirmation before the person
                authorised by the election co mmission
                for this purpose. In his/ her oath or
                affirmation, he/ she swears -
                    (a) To bear true faith and allegiance to
                    the Constitution of India
                    (b) To uphold the sovereignty and integ-
                    rity of India

                3. He/she must be not less than 30 years of
                age in the case of the Rajya Sabha and
                not less than 25 years of age in the case
                of the Lok Sabha.

                4. He/she must posses other qualifications
                prescribed by Parliament.

            The Parliament has laid down the follow-
            ing additional qualifications in the Represen-
            tation of People Act ( 1951).

                1. He/ she must be registered as an elector
                for a parHamentary constituency. This is
                same in the case of both, the Rajya Sabha
                and the Lok Sabha. The requirement that
                a candidate contesting an election to
                the Rajya Sabha from a particular state
                should be an elector in that particular
                state was dispensed with in 2003. In 2006,
                the Supreme Court upheld the constitu-
                tional validity of this change.
                
                2 He/ she must be a member of a scheduled
                caste or scheduled tribe in any state or
                union territory, if he/ she wants to con-
                test a seat reserved for them. Howeve r,
                a member of scheduled castes or sched-
                uled tribes can also contest a seat not
                reserved for them.

        Disqualifications
            Under the Constitution, a person shall be
            disqualified for being elected as a member
            of Parliament:
                1. if he/ she holds any office of profit under
                the Union or state government (except
                that of a minister or any other office
                exempted by Parliament).

                2. if he/she is of unsound mind and stands
                so declared by a court.

                3. if he/she is an undischarged insolvent.
                
                4. if he/she is not a citizen of India or has
                voluntarily acquired the citizenship of
                a foreign state or is under any acknowl-
                edgement of allegiance to a foreign
                state; and
                
                5. if he/she is so disqualified under any law
                made by Parliament.

            The Parliament has laid down the follow-
            ing additional disqualifications in the Repre-
            sentation of People Act (1951):

                1. He/she must not have been found guilty
                of certain electoral offences or corrupt
                practices in the elections.

                2. He/she must not have been convicted for
                any offence resulting in imprisonment
                for two or more years. But, the detention
                of a person under a preventive detention
                law is not a disqualification.
                
                3. He/she must not have failed to lodge an
                account of his/her election expenses
                within the time.
                
                4. He/ she must not have any interest in
                government contracts, works or services.
                
                5. He/she must not be a director or manag-
                ing agent nor hold an office of profit in
                a corporation in which the government
                has at least 25 per cent share.
                
                6. He/she must not have been dismissed
                from government service for corruption
                or disloyalty to the State.
                
                7. He/she must not have been convicted for
                promoting enmity between different
                groups or for the offence of bribery.
                
                8. He/she must not have been punished for
                preaching and practising social crimes
                such as untouchability, dowry and sati.

            On the question whether a member is
            subject to any of the above disqualifications,
            the President's decision is final. However, he/
            she should obtain the opinion of the election
            commission and act accordingly.

            Disqualification on Ground of Defection
            The Constitution also lays down that a person
            shall be disqualified from being a member
            of Parliament if he/she is so disqualified on
            the ground of defection under the provisions
            of the Thnth Schedule. A member incurs dis-
            qualification under the defection law:
                1. if he/she voluntarily gives up the mem-
                bership of the political party on whose
                ticket he/she is elected to the House;

                2. if he/she votes or abstains from voting
                in the House contrary to any direction
                given by his/ her political party;
                
                3. if any independently elected member
                joins any political party; and
                
                4. if any nominated member joins any polit-
                ical party after the expiry of six months.

            The question of disqualification under the
            Thnth Schedule is decided by the Chairman
            in the case of Rajya Sabha and Speaker in the
            case of Lok Sabha (and not by the President
            of India). In Kihoto Hollohan case (Kihoto Hollohan vs. Zachillhu, 1992)
            the Supreme Court ruled that the decision
            of the Chairman/Speaker in this regard is
            subject to judicial review.

        Vacating of Seats
            In the following cases, a member of Parlia-
            ment vacates his/ her seat.

            1. Double Membership A person cannot be
                a member of both Houses of Parliament at
                the same time. Thus, the Representation of
                People Act (1951) provides for the following:
                    (a) If a person is elected to both the Houses
                    of Parliament, he/ she must intimate
                    within 10 days in which House he/she
                    desires to serve. In default of such inti-
                    mation, his/ her seat in the Rajya Sabha
                    becomes vacant.

                    (b) If a sitting member of one House is also
                    elected to the other House, his/ her seat
                    in the first House becomes vacant.
                    
                    (c) If a person is elected to two seats in a
                    House, he/she should exercise his/ her
                    option for one. Otherwise, both seats
                    become vacant.

                Similarly, a person cannot be a member of
                both the Parliament and the state legislature
                at the same time. If a person is so elected,
                his/her seat in Parliament becomes vaca n t
                if he/ she does not res ign his/ her seat in the
                state legislature within 14 days.
                    - According to the prohibition of Simultaneous
                    Membership Rules (1950) made by the President.

            2. Disqualification If a m e mb e r of
                Pa rliamen t beco mes subject to any of the dis-
                qualifications specified in the Constitution ,
                his/ her seat becomes vacant. Here, the list
                of disqualifications a lso include the disquali-
                fi cation on the grounds o f defection under
                the provisions of the len th Schedule of the
                Constitution.

            3. Resignation A member may resign his/her
                seat by writing to the Chairman of Raj ya Sabha
                or Speaker of Lok Sabha , as the case may be.
                The seat falls vaca nt when the resignation is
                accepted. However, the Cha irman / Speaker
                may not accept the resignation if he/she is
                satisfied that it is not voluntary or genuine.

            4. Absence A House can dec1 are the seat of
                a member vacan t if he/ she is absent fro m all
                its meetings for a period of sixty days without
                its permiss io n. In computing the period of
                sixty days, no accou nt shall be taken of any
                period during wh ich the House is prorogued
                or adjourned for more than four consecutive
                days.

            5. Other cases A member has to vacate h is/
                her seat in the Parliament:
                (a) if his/ her election is dec1ared void by the
                court;
                (b) if he/she is expelled by the House;
                (c) if he/she is elected to the office of
                Presiden t or Vice-President; and
                (d) if he/she is appointed to the office of
                governor of a state.

                If a disqualified person is elected to the
                Parl iament, the Constitution lays down no
                procedure to dec1are the election void. This
                matter is dealt by the Representation of the
                People Act ( 1951), wh ich enab les the high
                court to declare an election vo id if a disquali-
                fied ca ndidate is elected. The aggrieved party
                can appeal to the Supreme Court agai nst the
                order of the high court in this regard.

        Oath or Affirmation
            Every member of either House of Parliament,
            before taking his/ her seat in the House, has to
            make and subscribe to an oath or affirmation
            before the President or some person appoin ted
            by him/ her for this purpose. In his/ her oath or
            affirmation, a member of Parliament swears:
                1. to bear true fait h a nd all egia nce to the
                Constitution of India;

                2. to uphold the sovereignty a nd integrity
                of India; and
                
                3. to faithfull y discharge the duty upon
                which he/she is about to enter.

            Unless a member takes the oath, he/she
            cannot vote and participate in the proceedings
            of the House and does not become eligible to
            parliamentary privileges and immunities.

            A person is liable to a penalty of 500 for
            each day he/ she sits or votes as a member in
            a House in the fo llowi ng conditions:
                1. Before taking and subscribing to the pre-
                scribed oath or affi rmatio n; or
                
                2. When he/she knows that he/ she is not
                qualified or that he/ she is disqualified
                for its membership; or
                
                3. When he/ she knows that he/ she is prohib-
                ited from sitting or voting in the House
                by virtue of any parliamentary law.

        Salaries and Allowances
            The members of either House of Parliament
            are entitled to receive such salaries and allow-
            ances as may be determined by Parliament,
            and there is no provision of pension in the
            Constitution. However, in 1976, the Parliament
            has provided pension to the members.

            In 1954, the Parliament enacted the Sal-
            ary, Allowances and Pension of Members
            of Parliament Act. In 2018, the salary of
            members was increased from 5O,OOO to
            1,00,000 per month, the constituency allow-
            ance from 4S,000 to 70,000 per month and
            the office expenses allowance from 45,OOO
            to 60,000 per mon th. Earlier in 2010, the
            daily allowance was increased from 1,000
            to 2,000 for each day of residence on duty.
                - Vide the Finance Act, 201 8. This Act amended the
                Sala ry, Allowances and Pension of Members of Par·
                Iiament Act, 1954.

            Besides, the members are also provided
            with travelling facilities, free accommodation,
            telephone, vehicle advance, medical facilities
            and so on.

            In 2018, the pension of every person who
            has served for any period as a member of
            Parliament was increased from . 20,OOO to
            2S,000 per month. Further, if a person has
            served as a member of Parliament for more
            than five years, he/she is paid an additional
            pension of 2,000 per month 1,500 per
            month before 2018) for every year served in
            excess of five years.
                - Section 3 of the Salaries and Allowances of Offi-
                cers of Parliament Act, 1953 (as amended).

            The salaries and allowances of the Speaker
            and Deputy Speaker of 10k Sabha and the
            Chairman and Deputy Chairman of Rajya
            Sabha are also determined by Parliame nt.
            They are charged on the Consolidated Fund of
            India and thus are not subject to the annual
            vote of Parliament.

            In 1953, the Parliament enacted the Sala-
            ries and Allowances of Officers of Parliament
            Act. Under this Act, "Officer of Parliam e nt ~
            means any of the following officers, na mely,
            the Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the
            Rajya Sabha and the Speaker and the Deputy
            Speaker of the Lok Sabha. In 2018, the Parlia-
            ment increased the salary of the Chairman of
            the Rajya Sabha from 1.25 lakh to 4 lakh
            pe r month. Simi larly, other Officers of
            Parliament (i.e., the Speaker and the Deputy
            Speaker of the, Lok Sabha and the Deputy
            Chairman of the Rajya Sabha) are entitled
            to rece ive a salary per month at the same
            rates as are payable to the Members of Par-
            liament. Further; each Officer of Parliament
            (other than the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha)
            is entitled to receive a dai1y allowance (for
            each day during the whole of his/her term) at
            the same rate as is payable to the Members of
            Parliament. Also, each Officer of Parliament
            (other than the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha)
            is entitled to receive a constituency allowance
            at the same rate as is payable to the Members
            of Parliam
                - Section 3 of the Salaries and Allowances of Offi-
                cers of Parliament Act, 1953 (as amended)ent.

            According to the same Act, the sumptu-
            ary allowance is paid to the Speaker of the
            Lok Sabha at the same rate as is payable to a
            Cabinet Minister (i.e., 2,000 per month).
            Likewise, the sumptuary al10wance is paid to
            the Deputy Speaker · of the Lok Sabha and the
            Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha at the
            same rate as is payable to a Minister of State
            (i.e., 1000 per month).
                - Section 5 of the Salaries and Allowances of Offi-
                cers of Parliament Act, 1953 (as amended).

    PRESIDING OFFICERS OF PARLIAMENT
        Each House of Parliament has its own presid-
        ing officer. There is a Speaker a nd a Deputy
        Speaker for the Lok Sabha and a Chairman
        and a Deputy Chairman for the Rajya Sabha.
        A panel of chairpersons for the Lok Sabha
        and a panel of vice-chairpersons for the Rajya
        Sabha is also appointed.

        Speaker of Lok Sabha
            Elect ion a nd Tenure The Speaker is elected
                by the Lok Sabha from amongst its m embers
                (as soon as may be, after its first sitting).
                Wheneve r the office of the Speaker fall s
                vacant, the Lok Sabha elects another mem-
                ber to fm the vacan cy. The date of election
                of the Speaker is fixed by the Preside nt.

                Usual1y, the Speaker remains in office dur-
                ing the life of the Lok Sabha. However, he/she
                has to vacate his/ her office earlier in any of
                the following three cases:

                    1. if he/ she ceases to be a member of the
                    Lok Sabha;

                    2. if he/ she resigns by writing to the Deputy
                    Speaker; and
                    
                    3. ifhe/she is removed by a resolution passed
                    by a majority of all the then members of
                    the Lok Sabha (i.e., an effective majority).
                    Such a resolution can be moved only after
                    giving 14 days' advance notice.

                When a resol ution for the removal of the
                Speaker is under consideration of the House,
                he/ she cannot preside at the sitting of the
                House, though he/ she may be present. How-
                ever, he/ she ca n speak and take part in the
                proceedings of the House at such a time and
                vote in the first instance, though not in the
                case of an equality of votes.

                It ShOll lei be noted here that, whenever the
                Lok Sabha is dissolved, the Speaker does not
                vacate his/her office and continues till the
                newly-elected Lok Sabha meets.

                The tenure of the Speakers of the Lok
                Sabha (from first to present) is mentioned
                in Thble 23.7.

            Role. Powers and Functions The Speaker is
                the head of the Lok Sabha, and its represen-
                tative. Hel she is the guardian of powers and
                privileges of the members, the House as a
                whole and its committees. He/ she is the prin-
                cipal spokesperso n of the House, and his/ her
                decision is fina l in all Parlia mentary matters.
                He/ she is thus much more than merely the
                presiding officer of the Lok Sabha. In these
                capacities, he/ she is vested with vast, varied
                and vital responsibilities a nd enjoys great
                honour, high dig ni ty and supreme authOrity
                within the House.

                The Speaker of the Lok Sabha derives his/
                her powers a nd duties from three sources, that
                is, the Constitution of India, the Rules of Pro-
                cedu re and Conduct of Business of Lok Sabha,
                and Parl iamentary Conventions ( residuary
                powers that are unwritten or unspecified in
                the Rules). Altogether, he/ she has the follow-
                ing powers and duties:
                    1. He/ she maintains order and decorum in
                    the House for conducting its business
                    and regulating its proceedings. This is
                    his/ her primary responsibility and he/
                    she has final power in this regard.
                    
                    2. He/ she is the final interpreter of the pro-
                    visions of (a) the Constitution of India,
                    (b) the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
                    of Business of Lok Sabha, and (c) the par-
                    liamentary precedents, within the House.
                    
                    3. I 'le/she adjourns the House or suspends
                    the meeting in absence of a quorum .
                    The quorum to constitute a meeting
                    of the House is one-tenth of the total
                    strength of the House.

                    4. He/ she does not vote in the first instance.
                    But he/ she can exercise a casting vote
                    in the case of a tie. In other words, only
                    when the ) 'Iouse is divided equal1 y on
                    any question, the Speaker is entitled to
                    vote. Such vote is called c.:1.sti n g vote, and
                    its purpose is to resolve a deadlock.
                    
                    5. Helshe presides over a joi nt setting of the
                    two Houses of Parliament. Such a sitting
                    is summoned by the President to settle
                    a deadlock between the two Houses on
                    a bi ll.
                    
                    6. He/ she ca n allow a 'secret' sitting of the
                    House at the request of the Leader of the
                    House. When the House sits in secret, no
                    stranger can be present in the chamber,
                    lobby or galleries except with the per-
                    m ission of the Speaker.
                    
                    7. He/ she decides whether a bill is a money
                    bi ll or not and hislher decision on this
                    question is fina l. When a money bill is
                    transmitted to the Rajya Sabha for recom-
                    mendation and presented to the President
                    for assent, the Speaker endorses on the bill
                    his/ her certificate that it is a money bill.
                    
                    8. He/she decides the questions of disquali-
                    fication of a member of the Lok Sabha,
                    arising o n the ground of defection under
                    the provisions of the Tenth Schedule.
                    In Ki/lOto Hollohan case (Kihoto Hollollan vs. Zachilihu, 1992), the
                    Supreme Court ruled that the decision
                    of the Speaker in this regard is subject
                    to judicial review.
                    
                    9. He/ she acts as the ex-officio chairman of
                    the Indian Parliamentary Group which
                    is a lin k between the Parliament oflndia
                    and the various parliaments of the world.
                    I-I e/ she also acts as the e,y-officio chair-
                    man of the conference of presiding offi-
                    cers of legislative bodies in the country.
                    
                    10. He/she appoints the chairman of all the
                    parliamentary committees of the Lok
                    Sabha and supervises their functioning.
                    He/she is the chairman of. the Business
                    Ad v i sory Commi ttee, th e Rul es
                    Committee and the General Purposes
                    Committee.

            Independence and Impartiality As the office
                of the Speaker is vested with great prestige,
                position a nd au thority, independence a nd
                impartiality becomes its sine qua non.

                The following provision s ensure the inde-
                penden ce a nd impartiality of the office of the
                Speaker:
                    1. He/she is provided with a security of
                    tenure. Hel she can be removed only by
                    a resolution passed by the Lok Sabha by
                    an effective majority ( ie, a majority of
                    all the then m embers of the House) and
                    not by a simple majority (ie, a majority
                    of the members present and voting in the
                    H.ouse). This motion of rem oval ca n be
                    considered and discussed only when it
                    has the support of at least 50 members.
                    
                    2. His/ her salaries and allowances are fixed
                    by Pa rliament. They are charged on the
                    Con solidated Fund of India and thus
                    a re not subject to the annual vote of
                    Parlia ment.
                    
                    3 . His/ her work and conduct cannot be dis-
                    cussed a nd criticised in the Lok Sabha
                    except on a substantive motion.
                    
                    4. His/her powers of regulating procedure
                    or conducting business or maintaining
                    order in the House are not subject to the
                    jurisdiction of any Court.

                    5. He/ she cannot vote in the first insta nce.
                    He/ she can only exercise a casting vote
                    in the event of a tie. This makes the
                    position of Speaker impartial.
                    
                    6. He/ she is given a very high position in the
                    order of precedence. He/she is placed at
                    seventh rank, along with the Chief Justice
                    of In,dia. This means, he/ she has a higher
                    rank than aU cabinet ministers, except the
                    Prime Minister or Deputy Prime Minister.

                In Britain, the Speaker is strictly a non-
                party man . There is a convention that the
                Speake r has to resign fro m his/ her party
                and remai n politically neutral. This healthy
                convention is not fully established in India
                where the Speaker does not resign from the
                membership of his/ her party on his/her eJec-
                tion to the exalted offi ce.

        Deputy Speaker of Lok Sabha
            Like the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker is also
            elected by the Lok Sabha itself from a mongst
            its members. He/ she is elected after the elec-
            tion of the Speaker has ta ken place. The date
            of ejection of the Deputy Speaker is fixed
            by the Speaker. Whenever the office of the
            Deputy Speaker falls vaca nt, the Lok Sabha
            elects a nother member to fiJI the vacancy.

            Like the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker
            remains in office usual1y during the life of the
            Lok Sabha. However, he/she may vacate his/ her
            office earlier in any of the following three cases:

                1. if he/ she ceases to be a member of the
                Lok Sabha;
                
                2. if he/she resigns by writing to the
                Speaker; a nd
                
                3. ifhe/ she is removed by a resolution passed
                by a majority of all the then members of
                the Lok Sabha(i.e., an effective majority).
                Such a resolution can be moved only after
                giving 14 days' advance notice.

            The Deputy Speaker performs the duties
            of the Speaker's office when it is vacant. He/
            she also acts as the Speaker when the latter is
            absent from the sitting of the House. In both
            the cases, he/ she assumes all the powers of the
            Speaker. He/ she also presides over the joint
            sitting of both the Houses of Pa rl ia ment, in
            case the Speaker is absent from such a sitting.

            It should be noted here that the Dep uty
            Speaker is not subordinate to the Speaker.
            He/ she is d irectly responsible to the House.

            The Dep uty Speaker has one special privi-
            lege, that is, whenever he/ she is appoi n ted as
            a member of a parliamentary committee, hel
            she auto matically becomes its chairman .

            Like the Speaker, the Deputy Spea ker, whi le
            presiding over the HOllse, cannot vote in the
            first insta nce; he/she ca n on ly exercise a cast-
            ing vote in the case of a tie. Further, when
            a resolution for the remova l of the Deputy
            Speake r is under consideration of the House,
            he/ she cannot preside at the sitting of the
            HOllse, though he/ she may be present.

            When the Speaker presides over the House,
            the Deputy Speaker is like any other ordinary
            member of the House. l'le/ she ca n speak in
            the House, partici pate in its proceedi ngs and
            vote on any question before the House.

            The Deputy Speaker is entitled to a regular
            sa.lary and allowance fixed by Parliament, a nd
            charged on the Conso lidated Fund of India.

            Us ually, the speaker comes fro m the rul ing
            party (or ruling all iance), while the post of
            Deputy Speake r goes to the oppos itio n party
            (or opposition allia nce). However, there have
            been certa in exceptiona l cases in th is regard.

            The Speaker and the Deputy Speake l~ while
            assuming their offices, do not make and sub-
            scribe any separate oath or affi rmation.

            The institutions of Speaker a nd Deputy
            Speaker originated in Ind ia in 1921 under
            the provisions of the Government of India
            Act of J9.19 (Mon tague-Chelmsford Reforms).
            At lhat time, the Speaker a nd the Depu ty
            Speaker were cal1 ed the President a nd Deputy
            President respectively a nd the sa me nomen-
            clature continued till 1947. Before 1921, the
            Governor-General of India used to preside
            over the meetings of the Central Legislative
            Council. In 1921, the Frederick Whyte and
            Sflch ida na nd Sin ha were appoi n ted by the
            Governor-Gene ral of ind i, a as the first Speaker
            and the first Deputy Speaker (respectively)
            of the centra l legislative asse mbly. In 1925,
            Vitha lbha i J. Patel beca me the first Indian
            and the fi rst elected Speaker of the cen tral
            leg islative asse mbl y. T he Governme n t of
            India Act of 1935 ch anged the no menclatures
            of Presiden t and Deputy Preside~t of the
            Central Legislative Assembly to the Speaker
            and Deputy Speake r respectively. However,
            the old nomenclature co nti nued till 1947
            as the federal part of the 1935 Act was not
            implemented. G.V. Mavala n kar and An an-
            thasaya nam Ay yanga r had the d istinction of
            bei ng the first Speaker a nd the fi rst Deputy
            Speaker (respectively) of the Lok Sabha. G.\'.
            Mavalankar also held the post of Speaker in
            the Constituent Assembly (Legislative) as well
            as the provis io na l Parliament. He/ she held
            the post of Speaker of Lok Sabha continuously
            for one decade from 1946 to 1956.

        Panel of Chairpersons of Lok Sabha
            Under the Rules of Lok Sabha, the Speaker
            nominates from a m ongst the members a
            pan el of not more than ten cha irpersons. Any
            of them can preside over the House in the
            absence of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker.
            He/ s he has the sa me power as the Speaker
            when so preS idi ng. He/ she holds office until
            a new panel of chairperso ns is no minated.
            When a me mber of the pa ne l of cha irpersons
            is a lso not present, any other person as deter-
            mined by House acts as the Speaker.

            It must be emphasised here that a member
            of Lbe panel of chairperso ns ca nnot preside
            over the House, when the office of the Speaker
            o r the Deputy Speaker is vacant. Du ring such
            time, the Speaker's duties are to be performed
            by such member of the l'louse as the President
            may appoi nt for the purpose. The elections arc
            held, as soon as possible, to fi ll the vacant posts.

        Speaker Pro Tem
            As provided by the Constitution, the Speaker
            of the last Lok Sabha vacates his/ her office
            immediately before the first meeting of the
            newly-elected Lok Sabha. Therefore, the Presi-
            den t appoi nts a member of the Lo k Sabha as
            the Speaker Pro Thm. Usuall y, the seniormost
            member is selected for this. The President
            administers oath to the Speaker Pro Tem.

            The Speaker Pro Tem has all the powers of
            the Speaker. He/ she presides over the first sit-
            ting of the newly-elected Lok Sabha. His/ her
            main duty is to administer oath to the new
            members. He/she also enables the Hou
            se to elect the new Speaker.

            When the new Speaker is elected by the
            House, the offioe of the Speaker Pro Thm
            ceases to exist. Hence, this office is a tempo-
            rary office, existing for a few days.
                - Far examph:, in the 13th Lok Sabha, Mr. Indrajit
                Gupta 'was ! appointed as Speaker Pro Thm on
                20 October 1999 and remained in that office till
                22 October 1999 when the new Speaker, Mr. G.M.C.
                8alayogi was elected.

        Chairman of Rajya Sabha
            The presiding officer of the Rajya Sabha is
            known as the Chairman. The Vice-President
            of India is the ex.-officio Chairman of the Rajya
            Sabha. During .any period when the Vice-
            President acts as President or discharges the
            functions of the President, he/she does not
            perform the duties of the office of the Chair-
            man of Rajya Sabha.

            The Chairm~n of the Rajya Sabha can be
            removed from his/ her office only if he/ she is
            removed from the office of the Vice-President.
            As a presiding officer, the powers and functions
            of the ChairI"itan in the Rajya Sabha are similar
            to those of the Speaker in the Lok Sabha. How-
            ever, the Speaker has two special powers which
            are not enjoyed by the Chairman:

                1. The Speaker decides whether a bill is a
                money biJI or not and his/ her decision
                on this question is final.
                
                2. The Speaker presides over a joint sitting
                of two Houses of Parliament.

            Unlike the Speaker (who is a member of the
            House), the Chairman is not a member of the
            House. But like the Speaker, the Chairman also
            cannot vote in the first instance. He/she too can
            cast a vote in the case of an eq'uality of votes.

            The Vice-President cannot preside over a
            sitting of the Rajya Sabha as its Chairman
            when a resol ution far his/ her removal is under
            consideration. However, he/she can be present
            and speak in the House and can take pa rt in
            its proceedings, without voting, even at such a
            time (while the Speaker can vate in the first
            instance when a resolution for his/her removal
            is under consideration of the Lok Sabha).

            As in case of the Speaker, the salaries a nd
            allowances of the Cha irm an a re also fixed
            by the Parliament. They are cha rged on the
            Consolidated Fund of India and thus a re not
            subject to the annual vote of Parliament.

            During any period when the Vice-President
            acts as President or discharges the functions of
            the President, he/ she is not entitled to any sal-
            ary or allowance payable to the Chairman of the
            Rajya Sabha. But he/she is paid the salary and
            allowance of the President during such a time.

        Deputy Chairman of Ra.;ya Sabha
            The Deputy Chairman is elected by the Rajya
            Sabha itself from amongst its m embers.
            Whenever the office of the Deputy Chairman
            fa lls vacant, the Rajya Sabha elects another
            member to fill the vacancy.

            The Deputy Chairm an vacates his/ her
            office in any of the following three cases:
                1. if he/ she ceases to be a member of the
                Hajy. Sabha;
                
                2. if he/ she reSigns by writing to the
                Chairman; and
                
                3. if he/ she is removed by a resolution
                passed by a majority of all the then
                members of the Rajya ·Sabha (Le., an
                effective majority). Such a resolution
                ca n be moved only after giving 14 days'
                advance notice.

            The Deputy Chairman performs the duties
            of the Chairman's office when it is vacant
            or when the Vice-President acts as P.resident
            or discharges the functions of the President.
            He/ she also acts as the Chairman when the
            latter is absent fro m the sitting of the House.
            In both the cases, he/she has all the powers
            of the Cha irman.

            It should be emphasised here that the Deputy
            Chairman is not subordinate to the Chairman.
            He/she is directly responsible to the Rajya Sabha.

            Like the Cha irman, the Deputy Chairman,
            while presiding over the House, ca nnot vote in
            the first instance; he/she ca n only exercise it
            casting vote in the case of a tie. F'urther, when
            a resolution for the removal of the Deputy
            Chairman is under consideration of the House,
            he/she cannot preside over a sitting of the
            House, though he/ she may be present.
            
            When the Chainnan presides over the House,
            the Deputy Chainnan is like any other ordinary
            member of the House. He/ she can speak in the
            House, participate in its proceedings and vote
            on any question before the House.

            Like the Chairman, the Deputy Chairma n
            is also e nti tled to a regular salary and a llow-
            ance. They are fixed by Parlia ment and are
            charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.

        Panel of Vice-Chairpersons of Rajya Sabha
            Under the Rules of Rajya Sabha, the Cha ir-
            man nominates from a mongst the me mbers
            a panel of vice-chairpersons. Anyone of them
            ca n preside over the House in the absence of
            the Chairman or the Deputy Cha irman. He/
            she has the same powers as the Cha irman
            when so presiding. He/ she holds office unt il a
            new panel of vice-chai rperso ns is nominated.
            
            Whe n a member of the pan el of vice-
            chairpersons is also not present, any other
            person as determined by the Ho use acts as
            the Chairma n.

            It m ust be emphasised he re that a me m-
            ber of the panel of vice-chairpersons cannot
            preside over the House, when the office of the
            Chairman or the Deputy Chairman is vacant.
            During such time, the Chairman's duties arc
            to be performed by such member of the House
            as the President may a ppoint fo r the purpose.
            The elections a re held, as soon as pOSSible, to
            fi ll the vacant posts.

        Secret a riat of Parliament
            Each House of Parliament has separate sec-
            reta rial staff of its own, though there ca n
            be some posts common to both the Houses.
            Their recruitment and service conditions are
            regulated by Parliament. The secretariat of each
            House is headed by a secret.1. ry-general. He/ she
            is a permanent officer and is appointed by the
            presiding officer of the House.

    LEADERS IN PARLIAMENT
        Leader ofthe House
            Under the Rules of Lok Sabha, the 'Leader of
            the House' mea ns the prime minister, if he/
            she is a member of the Lok Sabha, or a min is-
            ter who is a member of the Lok Sabha and is
            nominated by the prime minister to function
            as the Leader of the House. There is a lso a
            'Leader of the House' in the Rajya Sabha. He/
            she is a minister and a member of the Rajya
            Sabha a nd is nominated by the prime minister
            to function as such. The leader of the house in
            either House is an important fun ctionary a nd
            exercises direct influence on the conduct of
            business. He/she can also nom inate a deputy
            leader of the House. The same funct ionary in
            USA is known as the 'majority leader'.

        Leader of the Opposition
            In each House of Parl iament, there is the
            'Leader of the Opposition'. In a parliamentary
            system of govern ment, the leader of the opposi-
            tion has a significant role to play. I -lis/her main
            functions are to provide a constructive criti-
            cism of the policies of the government and to
            provide an alternative government. Therefore,
            the leaders of Opposition in the Lok Sabha
            and the Raj ya Sabha were accorded statutory
            recognition in 1977 under the Salary and Allow-
            a nces of Leaders of Opposition in Parliament
            Act, 1977. They a re also entitled to the salary,
            allmV'd nces and other facilities equiva lent to
            that of a cabinet minister. It was in 1969 that an
            official leader of the opposition was recognised
            for the first time. The sa me functionary in USA
            is known as the 'minority leader'.

            Under the above Act, the ' Leade r of the
            Opposition' mea ns that me mber of the Rajya
            Sabha or the Lok Sabha who is, for the time
            being, the Leader in that House of the party
            in oppos ition to the government having the
            grea test nume rical strength and recognised
            as such by the Chairman or the Speaker.
            Further, where there are two or more parties
            in opposition to the government having the
            same numerical strength, the Chairman or
            the Speaker shall (having regard to the sta-
            tus of the parties) recognise anyone of the
            Leaders of such parties as the Leader of the
            Opposition and such recognition shall be final
            and conclusive. According to the directions
            issued by both the Chairman and the Speaker,
            the minimum numerical strength required
            for recognition as a political party is one-
            tenth of the total membership of that House.

            The British political system has a n unique
            institution called the 'Shadow Cabinet'. It is
            formed by the Opposition party to balance
            the ruling cabinet and to prepare its mem-
            bers for future ministerial offices. In this
            shadow cabinet, almost every member in the
            ruling cabinet is 'shadowed' by a correspond-
            ing member in the opposition cabinet. This
            shadow cabinet serves as the 'alternate cabi-
            net' if there is change of government. That
            is why Ivor Jennings described the leader of
            Opposition as the 'alternative Prime Minis-
            ter'. He/she enjoys the status of a minister
            and is paid by the government.

            Though the offices of the leader of the
            House and the leader of the Opposition are
            not mentioned in the Constitution of India,
            they are mentioned in the Rules ofthe House
            and Parliamentary Statute respectively.

        Whips
            The office of 'whip' is mentioned neither in
            the Constitution of India nor in the Rules
            of the House. It is based on the conventions
            of the parliamentary government.

            Every poJitical party, whethe r ruling or
            opposition has its own Chief whip and whips
            in the ParHament. The whip is appointed by
            the political party to serve as an assistant floor
            leader:. He/she is charged with the responsibil-
            ity of ensuring the attendance of his/ her party
            members in large numbers and securing their
            support in favour of or against a particular
            issue. He/she regulates and monitors their
            behaviour in the Parliament. The members
            are supposed to follow the directives given by
            the whip. Otherwise, disciplinary action can
            be taken.

            The Chief whip ofthe government party in
            the Lok Sabha is the Minister of Parliamentary
            Affairs. In the Rajya Sabha, the Minister of
            State for Parliamentary Affairs holds this posi-
            tion. The Chief whip is directly responsible to
            the leader of the House. It is part of his/her
            duties to advise the government on parliamen-
            tary business and to maintain a close liaison
            with the ministers in regard to parliamentary
            business affecting their departments.
                - M.N. Kau l and S.L. Shakdher; Practice and Proce-
                dure of Parliament, Sixth Edition, 2009, Lok Sabha
                Secretariat, pp. 1 51-52.

            The Chief whip of a recognised party and
            a recognised group is entitled to telephone
            and secretarial facilities under the Leaders
            and Chief Whips of Recognised Parties and
            Groups in Parliament (Facilities) Act, 1998.

            Under the above Act, a recognised party
            means every party which has a strength of
            not less than fifty-five members in respect
            of the Lok Sabha and twenty-five members in
            respect of the Rajya Sabha. Similarly, a rec·
            ognised group means every party which has
            a strength of not less than thirty members in
            respect of the Lok Sabha and fifteen members
            in respect of the Rajya Sabha.

    SESSIONS OF PARLIAMENT
        Summoning
            The President from time to time summons
            each House of Parliament to meet at such
            time and place as he/ she thinks fit. But, the
            maximum gap between two sessions of Par-
            liament ca nnot be more than six months.
            In other words, the Parliament should meet
            at least twice a year. There are usually three
            sessions in a year, viz,
                1. The Budget.Session (February to May);
                
                2. The Monsoon Session (July to September);
                and
                
                3. The Winter Sessio n (November to
                December).

            A 'session' of Parl iament is the period
            spanning between the first sitting ofa House
            and its prorogation (or dissolution in the
            case of the Lok Sabha). During a session, the
            House meets everyday to transact business.
            The period spanning between the proroga-
            tion of a House and its reassembly in a new
            sessio n is called 'recess'.

        Adjournment
            A session of Parliament consists of many
            meetings. Each meeting of a day consists of
            two sittings, that is, a morning sitting from
            11 am to 1 pm and post-lunch sitting from
            2 pm to 6 pm. A Sitting of Parliament can be
            terminated by adjournment or adjournment
            sine die or prorogation or dissolution (in
            the case of the Lok Sabha). An adjournment
            suspends the work in a sitting for a specified
            time, which may be hours, days or weeks.

        Adjournment Sine Die
            Adjournment sine die means terminating a
            sitting of Parliament for an indefinite period.

            In other words, when the House is adjourned
            without naming a day for reassembly, it is
            ca lled adjournment sine die. The power of
            adjournment as well as adjournment sine die
            lies with the presiding officer of the House.
            He/ she can also ca ll a sitting of the House
            before the date or time to which it has been
            adjourned or at any time after the House has
            been adjourned sine die.

        Prorogation
            The presiding officer (Speaker or Chairman)
            declares the House adjourned sine die, when
            the business of a session is completed. Within
            the next few days, the President issues a
            notification for prorogation of the session .
            However, the President can also prorogue the
            House while in session.

            The specific differences between adjourn·
            ment and prorogation arc summarised in
            1llble 23.1.

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 23. 1 Adjournment vs Prorogation

Adjournment Prorogation
1. It only terminates a sitting and not a session of
the House.
1. It not only terminates a sitting but also a session of
the House.
2. It is done by presiding offtcer of the House.
2. It is done by the President of India.
3. It does not affect the bills or any other business
pending before the House and the same can be
resumed when the House meets again.
3. It also does not affect the bills or any other business
pending before the House.1 3 However. all pending
notices (other than those for Introducing bills) lapse
on prorogation and fresh notices have to be given for
the next session\3". In Britain. prorogation brings to
an end all bills or any other business pending before
the House.
    - Under Article 107 (3) of the Constitution, a bill pending in Parliament shall not lapse by reason of the
    prorogation of the Houses.
        Under Rule 336 of the Lok Sabha, a motion, resolution or an amendment, which has been moved and is
        pending in the House, shall not lapse by reason only of the prorogation of the 1 · louse
    - Under Rule 335 of the Lok Sabha, on the prorogation of the House, all pend ing notices, other than
    notices of intention to move for leave to introduce a Bill, shall lapse and fresh notices shall be given for
    the next session
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

        Dissolution
            Rajya Sabha, being a permanent House, is not
            subject to dissolution. Only the Lok Sabha is
            subject to dissolution. Unlike a prorogation,
            a dissolution ends the very life of the existing
            House, and a new House is constituted after
            general elections are held. The dissolution
            of the Lok Sabha may take place in either of
            two ways:
                1. Automatic dissolution, that is, on the
                expiry of its tenure of five years or the
                terms as extended during a national
                emergency; or
                
                2. Whenever the President decides to dissolve
                the House, which helshe is authorised to
                do. Once the Lok Sabha is dissolved before
                the completion of its normal tenure, the
                dissolution is irrevocable.

            When the Lok Sabha is dissolved, all busi·
            ness including bills, motions, resolutions,
            notices, petitions and so on pending before
            it or its committees lapse. They (to be pur·
            sued further) must be reintroduced in the
            newly-constituted Lok Sabha. However, some
            pending bills and all pending assurances
            that are to be examined by the Committee on
            Government Assurances do not lapse on the
            dissolution of the Lok Sabha. The position
            with respect to lapsing of bills is as fol1ows:
                1. A bill pending in the Lok Sabha lapses
                (whether originating in the Lok Sabha
                or transmitted to it by the Rajya Sabha).
                
                2. A bill passed by the LokSabha but pending
                in the Rajya Sabha lapses.
                
                3. A bill not passed by the two Houses due
                to disagreement and if the President has
                notified the holding of a joint sitting
                before the dissolution of Lok Sabha, does
                not lapse.
                
                4. A bill pending in the Rajya Sabha but not
                passed by the Lok Sabha does not lapse.
                
                5. A bill passed by both Houses but pending
                assent of the President does not lapse.
                
                6. A bill passed by both Houses but returned
                by the President for reconsideration of
                Houses does not lapse.

        Quorum
            Quorum is the minimum number of members
            required to be present in the House before it
            can transact any business. It is one-tenth of
            the total number of members in each House
            including the presiding officer. It means that
            there must be at least 55 members present in
            the 10k Sabha and 25 members present in the
            Rajya Sabha, if any business is to be conducted.
            If there is no quorum during a meeting of the
            House, it is the duty of the presiding officer
            either to adjourn the House or to suspend the
            meeting until there is a quorum.

        Voting in House
            All matters at any sitting of either House or
            joint sitting of both the Houses are decided by
            a majority of votes of the members present and
            voting, excluding the presiding officer. Only a
            few matters, which are specifically mentioned in
            the Constitution, require either effective major-
            ity or special majority, not simple majority.

            The presiding officer of a House does not
            vote in the first instance, but exercises a cast-
            ing vote in the case of a n equality of votes.
            The proceedings of a House arc to be valid
            irrespective of any unauthorised voting or par·
            ticipation or any vacancy in its membership.

            The follO\ving points can be noted with
            respect to the voting procedure in the Lok Sabha,
                1. On the conclusion of a debate, the
                Speaker shall put the question and
                invite those who are in favour of the
                motion to say 'Aye' a nd those again st
                the motion to say .'No'.
                
                2. The Speaker shan then say' 'r think the
                Ayes (or the Noes, as the case may be)
                have it.' If the opinion of the Speaker as
                to the decision of a question is not ch?l-
                lenged, hel she shall say twice: The Ayes
                (or the Noes, as the case may be) have it'
                and the question before the House shall
                be determined accordingly.
                
                3. (a) If the opinion of the Speaker as to
                the decision of a question is chal-
                lenged, hel she shall order that the
                Lobby be cleared.
                    (b) After the lapse of three minutes and
                    thirty seconds, hel she shall put the
                    question a second time and decla re
                    whether in hisl he r opinion the
                    'Ayes' or the 'Noes' have it.

                    (c) If the opinion so declared is again
                    challenged, hel she shall direct that
                    the votes be recorded either by oper-
                    ating the automatic vote recorder or
                    by using 'Aye' and 'No' Slips in the
                    House or by the Members going into
                    the Lobbies.

                4. If in the opinion of the Speaker, the
                Division is unnecessarily claimed, hel
                she l1)ay ask the members who are for
                'Aye' and those for 'No' respectively to
                rise in their places and, on a count being
                taken, helshe may declare the determi-
                nation of the House. In such a case, the
                names of the voters shall not be recorded.

        Methods of Voting
            The various methods adopted for voting in the
            Lok Sabha are explained below (This information is adopted from the official website of the Lok Sa bha (Digital Sansad)):
                1. Voice Vote: It is a simple method for
                deciding a question put by the Speaker
                on a motion made by a member. Under
                this method, the question before the
                House is determ ined by the 'Ayes' or the
                'Noes', as the case may be.

                2. Division: There are three methods of
                holding a Division. These are:
                (a) By operating the Automatic Vote
                Recording Equipment;
                    (b) By distributing 'Ayes' and 'Noes' slips
                    in the House; and
                    (c) By members going into the Lobbies.
                    However, the method of reco rding of
                    votes in the Lobbies has become obso-
                    lete ever since the installation of the
                    Automatic Vote Recording Equipment.
                
                3_ Secret Ballot: During an 'open' vot-
                ing period, the individual results are
                shown by the three colours: green
                for 'Ayes', red for 'Noes' and yellow
                for 'Abstain' on the Individual Resu lt
                Display Panel. The secret voting, if
                any, is held on similar lines except that
                the Light Emitting Diode (LED) on the
                Individual Result Display Pane l flashes
                only wh ite light to s how that the vote
                has been recorded.
                
                4. Recording of Votes by Distribution of
                Slips: The method of recording of votes
                by members on 'Ayes' and 'Noes' slips is
                generally resorted to in the eventuality of:
                    (a) Sudden fa il ure of the working of
                    the Automatic Vote Record ing
                    Equipment; and
                    (b) At the commencement of the new
                    Lok Sabha, before the sea ts/ divi-
                    sion numbers have been allotted to
                    the members.
                
                5. Physical Count of Members in their
                Places Instead of a Formal Division: If
                in the opinion ofthe Speaker, a Division
                is unnecessarily cla imed, he/she may
                ask the members who are for 'Ayes' and
                those for 'Noes', respectively, to rise in
                their places and on a count being takes,
                he/ she may declare the determination
                of the House. In such a case, the particu-
                lars of voting of the members are not
                recorded.
                
                6. Casting Vote: If in a Division, the num-
                ber of 'Ayes' and 'Noes' is equal, the
                question is decided by the casting vote
                of the Speaker. Under the provisions of
                the Constitution, the Speaker (or the
                person acting as such) cannot vote in a
                Division; he/she has only a casting vote
                which he/ she must exercise in the case
                of equality of votes.

        Language in Parliament
            The Constitution has declared Hindi and Eng-
            lish to be the languages for transacting busi-
            ness in the Parliament. However, the presiding
            officer ca n penn it a member to address the
            House in his/ her mother-tongue. In both the
            Houses, facilities are available for si multa-
            neous interpretation of speeches made in
            a ny of the languages specified in the Eighth
            Schedule of the Constitution into Hindi and
            English. However, if a member addresses the
            House in a language for which simultaneous
            in terpretaton facility is not available, he/ she
            has to provide a translation copy of his/ her
            speech in Hindi or English.
            
            Though English was to be discontinued
            as a floor language after the expiration of
            fifteen years from the commencement of the
            Constitution (that is, in 1965), the Official
            Languages Act (1963) allowed English to be
            continued along with Hindi.

        Rights of Ministers and Attorney General
            In addition to the members of a House, every
            minister and the attorney general of India
            have the right to speak and take part in the
            proceedings of either House, any jOint sitting
            of both the Houses and any committee of Par·
            liament of which he/ she is a member, without
            being entitled to vote. There are two reasons
            underlying this constitutional provision:
                1. A minister can participate in the proceed-
                ings of a House, of which he/she is not
                a member. In other words, a minister
                belonging to the Lok Sabha can par·
                ticipate in the proceedings of the Rajya
                Sabha and vice·versa.
                
                2. A minister, who is not a member of either
                House, can participate in the proceed.
                ings of both the Houses. It should be
                noted here that a person can remain a
                minister for six months, without being a
                member of either House of Parliament.

        Lame-duck Session
            It refers to the last session of the preceding
            Lok Sabha, after a new Lok Sabha has been
            elected. Those members of the preceding Lok
            Sabha who could not get re·elected to the new
            Lok Sabha are called lame-ducks.

            During the years 1957 and 1962 when
            general elections to Lok Sabha were held,
            in addition to three sessions of the new Lok
            Sabha, one session each of the preceding
            Lok Sabha was also held after elections to
            new Lok Sabha had taken place and results
            thereof had been a nnounced, but before
            the new Lok Sabha was duly constituted.
            These were popularly known as "lame-duck
            sessions". The purpose of these sessions was
            to pass the Vote on Account to enable the gov-
            ernment to ca rryon till the n ew Lok Sabha
            was constituted. However, there was no lame-
            duck session of the Third Lok Sabha as the
            Fourth Lok Sabha was constituted soon after
            the result of the Fourth General Elections
            had been announced. The Vote on Account
            was passed in the first session of the new
            Lok Sabha.
                - M.N. Kaul and S.L. Shakdher, Practice and Proce-
                dure of Parliament, Sixth Edition, 2009, Lok Sabha
                Secretariat, pp. 454-55

    TYPES OF MAJORITY
        The following four types of majority are
        required to determine the various matters in
        the Parliament:

            1. Simple Majority
                It is a majority of the members present and
                voting in the House. It is also known as ordi-
                nary majority or functional majority or work-
                ing majority. Article 100 of the Constitution
                states that except as otherwise provided in
                this Constitution, all questions at any sitting
                of either House or joint sitting of the Houses
                shall be determined by a majority of votes of
                the members present and voting. This means
                that the simple majority is the general rule pre-
                scribed by the Constitution for the determina-
                tion of questions in the Parliament. This type
                of majority is required in the following cases:
                    (a) Passing of the ordinary bills, money bills
                    a nd financial bills.
                    
                    (b) Passing of the Adjournment Motion, No·
                    Confide nce Motion, Confidence Motion,
                    Censure Motion and Motion of Thanks.
                    
                    (c) Removal of the Vice-President in the Lok
                    Sabha (Article 67).
                    
                    (d) Approval of the imposi tion of the
                    President's Rule (Article 356).
                    
                    (e) Approval of the proclamation of financial
                    emergency (Article 360).
                    
                    (f) Election of the Speaker and the Deputy
                    Speaker of the Lok Sabha (Article 93)

                    (g) Election of the Deputy Chai rman of the
                    Rajya Sabha (A rticle 89).

                    (h) Passi ng of a resolution by the Lok Sabha
                    fo r disapproving the continuance of the
                    nalional emergency (A rticle 352).

            2. Effective Majority
                It means a majority of the total membership
                of the House excluding the vacan t seats. In
                other wo rds, it is it majority of the effective
                stre ngth of the I-louse. For example, the effec-
                tive majority in the case of R.:1j ya Sabha is
                111 , if the re are 25 vacant seats (out of the
                total 245 me mbers). Similarly, the effecti ve
                majority in the case of Lok Sabha is 265 if
                there are 15 vaca nt seats (out of the total 543
                members). This type of majority is referred
                in the Constitution as ~a major ity of all the
                then membe rs of the House". It is required in
                the folJow i ng cases:

                    (a) Removal of the Vice·Preside nt in the
                    Ra.jya Sabha (A rticle 67)
                    (b) Re moval of the Deputy Chairma n of the
                    Rajya Sabha (A rticle 90)
                    (c) Removal of the Speake r and the Deputy
                    Speaker of the Lok Sabha (Articl e 94)

            3. Absolute Majority
                It mea ns a majority of the total membership
                of th e !-l ouse, irrespecti ve of the fact wh ether
                there are vacant seats o r absentees. For exam.
                pie, the absolute majority in the case of Rajya
                Sabha is 123 (out of the total 245 members).
                Si milarly, the absolute majori ty in the case of
                Lok Sabha is 272 (out of the total 543 mem.
                bers). T his type of majority is not prescribed
                by the Constitution for a ny case (or p urpose)
                as a sL. 'lndalone (single) requirement. But, it
                is required in certa in cases as a compone nt
                of specia l majority ( i.e., sp ecial majority-I
                which is explai ned below).

            4. Special Majority
                The va rious cases of requirement of special
                majority can be further classified in the fo l-
                lowi ng way:

                    Special Majority-I A majority of the total
                    me mbership of each House a nd a two-thi rds
                    majority of the me mbers present a nd voting
                    is requ ired in the following cases:
                        (a) Ame ndment of the Constitution (Article
                        368)
                        
                        (b ) Re mOVed of the .Judges of the Supre me
                        Court (A rticle 124)
                        
                        (c) Re mova l of the Judges of the High Courts
                        (Article 217)
                        
                        (d) Removal of the Comptrolle r and Auditor
                        Gene ra l of India (Article 148)
                        
                        (e) Remova l of the Ch ief Election Commi-
                        ssio ner (Article 324)
                        
                        (f) Re m ova l of the State Elec tion
                        Co mm issioner (Article 243K)
                        
                        (g) Pa rlia mentary approval of proclamation
                        of national e me rgency (Article 352)

                    Special Majority-II A two-thirds maj or.
                    ity of the total me mbership of each House
                    is requ ired fo r the impeachm e nt of t he
                    President (A rticle 61).

                    Special Majority-III A two·thirds majority of
                    the mem bers present a nd voting ( in th e Raj )'a
                    Sabha) is required in the followin g cases:
                        (a) Recommendation for the creation of new
                        All-Indi a Services (A rticle 312)
                        (b) Parliamentary legislation on matters in
                        the State List (Article 249)

    DEVICES OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINCS
        Question Hour
            T he first hour of every parliamen tary sit-
            ti ng is slotted fo r this. During this time, the
            me mbers ask questions a nd the m in isters
            usua lly give answers. The questions a rc of
            three kinds, namely, starred, unstarred and
            short notice.

            A starred question (distinguished by a n
            asteri sk) requires an oral answer a nd hence
            supplemenwry questions can fo llow.

            An ul1starrcd question, o n the other hand,
            requires a written answe r and he nce, supple-
            mentary questions ca n not fo llow.

            A short notice question is one that is
            asked by giving a notice of less than ten days.
            It is answered orally.

            In addition to the ministers, the questions
            can also be asked to the private members.
            Thus, a question may be addressed to a pri-
            vate member jfth~ subject matter of the ques-
            tion relates to some Bill, resolution or other
            matter connected with the business of the
            House for which that member is responsible.
            The procedure in regard to such question is
            the same as' that followed in the case of ques-
            tions addressed to a m-inister.

            The list of starred, ul1starred, short notice
            questioris and questions to private members
            are printed in green, white, light pink and
            yellow colour, respectively, to distinguish
            them from one another.

        Zero Hour
            Unlike the question hour, the zero hour is not
            mentioned in the Rules of Procedure. Thus it
            is ~n l informal device available to the members
            to raise various matters of urgent public impor-
            tance. The zero hour starts immediately after
            the qu~tion hour and lasts until the agenda for
            the day.eie, regular business of the House) is
            taken up. In other words, the time gap between
            the question hour and the agenda is known as
            zero hour. It is an Indian innovation in the fi eld
            of parliamentary procedures and has been in
            existence since 1962.

        Motions
            No discussions on a matter of general public
            importance can take place except on a motion
            made with the consent of the presiding offi-
            cer. The House expresses its decisions or
            opimons on various issues through the adop-
            tion or reJection of motions moved by either
            ministers or private members.

            The motions moved by the members to
            raise discussions on various matters fall into
            three principal categories:

                1. Substantive Motion: It is a self-contained
                independent proposal dealing with a
                very important matter like impeachment
                of the President or removal of Chief
                Election Commissioner.

                2 . Substitute Motion: It is a motion that
                is moved in substitution of an original
                motion and proposes an alternative to
                it. If adopted by the House, it supersedes
                the original motion.

                3. Subsidiary Motion: It is a motion that,
                by itself, has no meaning and cannot
                state the decision of the House without
                reference to the original motion or pro-
                ceedings of the House. It is divided into
                three sub-categories:
                    (a) Ancillary Motion: It is used as the
                    regular way of proceeding with
                    various kinds of business.
                    (b) Superseding Morion: It is moved in the
                    course of debate on another issue
                    and seeks to supersede that issue.
                    (c) Amendment: It seeks to modify or
                    substitute only a part of the origi-
                    nal motion.

            Closure Motion It is a motion moved by a
            member to cut short the debate on a matter
            before the House. If the m otion is approved
            by the House, debate is stopped forthwith and
            the. matter is put to vote. There are four kinds
            of closure motions (J.c. Johari: Indian Government and Politlcs, Vishal, Volume II , Thirteenth Edition, 2001, p. 360)

                (a) Simple Closure: It is one when a member
                moves that the 'matter having been suf-
                ficiently discussed be now put to vote'.
                
                (b) Closure by Compartments: In this case, the
                clauses of a bill or a lengthy resolution
                are grouped into parts before the com-
                mencement of the debate. The debate
                covers the part as a whole and the entire
                part is put to vote.
                
                (c) Kangaroo Closure: Under this type, only
                important clauses are taken up for
                debate and voting and the intervening
                clauses are skipped over and taken as
                passed.
                
                (d) Guillotine Closure: It is one when the
                undiscussed clauses of a bill or a resolut-
                ion are also put to vote along with the
                discussed ones due to want of time (as
                the time allotted for the discussion is
                over).

            Privilege Motion It is concerned with the
            breach of parliamentary privileges by a min-
            ister. It is moved by a member when he/ she
            feels that a minister has committed a breach
            of privilege of the House or one or more of its
            members by withholding facts of a case or by
            giving wrong or distorted facts. Its purpose is
            to censure the con cerned minister.

            Calling Attention Motion It is introduced in
            the Parliament by a member to C<1. 11 the atten-
            tion of a minister to a matter of urgent public
            importance, and to seek a n authoritative state-
            ment from him/ her on that mattcr. Like the
            zero hour, it is also an Indian innovation in
            the parliamentary procedure and has been in
            existence since 1954. However, unlike the zero
            hour, it is mentioned in the Rules of Procedure.

            Adjournment Motion It is introduced in the
            Parliame nt to draw attention of the House
            to a definite matter of urgent public impor-
            tance, and needs the support of 50 members
            to be admitted. As it interrupts the normal
            business of the House, it is regarded as an
            extraordinary device. It involves an element
            of censure agafnst the government and hence
            Raj ya Sabha is not perm itted to make use of
            this device. The discussion on an adjourn-
            ment motion should last for not less than two
            hours and thirty minutes.
            The right to move a motion for an adjourn-
            ment of the business of the House is subject
            to the fo llowing restrictions:
                1. It should ra ise a matter which is defi-
                nite, fac tua l, urge nt a nd of pub li c
                importance;
                2. It should not cover more than one matter;
                3. It should be restricted to a speC ific matter
                of recent occurrence and should not be
                framed in general terms;
                4. It should not raise a question of privilege;
                5. It should not revive discussion on a mat-
                te r that has been discussed in the same
                session;
                6. It should not deal with any matter that is
                under adjudication by court; a nd
                7. It should not raise any question that can
                be raised on a distinct motion.

            No-Confidence Motion Article 75 of the
            Constitution says that the council of minis-
            ters shall be collectively responsible to the
            Lok Sabha. It means that the ministry stays
            in office so long as it enjoys confidence of the
            majority of the members of the Lok Sabha.
            In other words, the Lok Sabha ca n remove
            the ministry from office by passing a no-
            confidence motion . The motion needs the
            support of 50 members to be admitted.

            Confidence Motion The motion of con-
            fidence has come up as a new procedura l
            device to cope with the emerging situations
            of fractured ma ndates resulting in hung par-
            liament, minority governments and coalition
            governments. The governments formed with
            wafer-thin majority have been called upon by
            the President to prove their majority on the
            floor of the House. The government of the
            day, sometimes, on its own , seeks to prove its
            majority by moving a motion of confidence
            and winning the co nfidence of the House. If
            the confide nce motion is negatived, it results
            in the fall of the government.
                - T K. Viswa nathan (Editor), The IIldian Parliamellf,
                Lok Sabha Secretarial, Fourteenth Ed ition, 2011,
                p. 21.

            Censure Motion A censure motion is differ-
            ent from a no-confide nce motion as shown
            in 'nlble 23.2.

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 23.2 1. 2. 3. Censure Motion vs No Confidence Motion
Censure Motion No-Confidence Motion
It should state the reasons for its adoption in the
Lok Sabha.
It can be moved against an individual minister
or a group of ministers or the entire council of
ministers.
It is moved for censuring the council of ministers
for specific policies and actions.
4 If it is passed in the Lok Sabha, the council of
ministers need not resign from the office.
1.
2.
3.
4.
It need not state the reasons for its adoption in the
Lok Sabha.
tt can be moved against the entire council of minis-
ters only.
It is moved for ascertaining the confidence of Lok
Sabha in the council of ministers.
If it Is passed in the Lok Sabha, the council of minis-
lers must resign from office.
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

            Motion of Thanks The fi rst session after each
            general election and the first session of every
            fiscal year is addressed by the President. In this
            address, the President outlines the policies and
            programmes of the government in the preced-
            ing yea r a nd ensuing year. This address of the
            President, which corresponds to the 'speech
            from the Throne in Britain', is discussed in
            both the Houses of Parliament on a motion
            called the 'Motion of Thanks'. At the end of
            the diSCU SS ion, the motion is put to vote. This
            motion must be passed in the House. Otherwise,
            it amounts to the defeat of the government. This
            inaugural speech of the President is an occa-
            sion available to the members of Parliament to
            raise discussions and debates to examine and
            criticise the government and administration
            for its lapses and failures.

            No-Day-Yet-Named Motion It is a motion
            that has been admitted by the Speaker but
            no date has been fixed for its discussion. The
            Speaker, after considering the state of busi-
            ness in the House and in consultation with
            the leader of the House or on the recommen-
            dation of the Business Advisory Committee,
            allots a day or days or part of a day for the
            discussion of such a motion.

            Dilatory Motion It is a motion for the
            adjournment of the debate on a bill/ motion/
            resolution etc. or a motion to retard or delay
            the progress of a business under consideration
            of the House. It can be moved by a member at
            any time after a motion has been made. The
            debate on a dilatory motion must be restricted
            to the matter contained in such motion. If the
            Speaker is of the opinion that such a motion
            is an abuse of the rules of the House, he/she
            may either forthwith put the question thereon
            or decline to propose the question.

        Point of Order
            A member can raise a point of order when
            the proceedings of the House do not follow
            the normal rules of procedure. A point of
            order should relate to the interpretation
            or enforcement of the Rules of the House
            or such articles of the Constitution that
            regulate the business of the House and
            should raise a question that is within the
            cognizance of the Speaker. It is usually
            raised by an opposition member in order to
            control the government. It is an extraordi-
            nary device as it suspends the proceedings
            before the House. No debate is allowed on
            a point of order.

        Half-an-Hour Discussion
            It is meant for discussing a matter of suf-
            ficient public importance, which has been
            subjected to a lot of debate and the answer to
            which needs elucidation on a matter of fact.
            The Speaker can allot three days in a week for
            such discussions. There is no formal motion
            or voting before the House.

        Short Duration Discussion
            It is also known as two-hour discussion as the
            time allotted for such a discussion should not
            exceed two hours. The members of the Parlia-
            ment can raise such discussions on a matter
            of urgent public importance. The Speaker can
            allot two days in a week for such discussions.
            There is neither a formal motion before the
            house nor voting. This device has been in
            existence since 1953.

        Special Mention
            A matter which is not a po int of order or
            whi ch ca nnot be raised du ri ng question
            hour, half-a n hour discussion, short duration
            discussion or under adjournm ent motion,
            ca lli ng a ttention notice or under a ny rule
            of the House ca n be raised under the specia l
            mention in the Rajya Sabha. Its equivalent
            procedural dev ice in the Lok Sabha is known
            as 'Notice ( Mention ) Under Rule 377'.

        Resolutions
            A resolutio n is a self-contained independent
            proposal submitted for the approval of the
            House a nd drafted in such a way as to be
            capable of ex pressing a decision of the House.
            All resolutions are substa ntive motions.

            The me mbers ca n move resolutions to
            draw th e attention of the House or the
            government to matte rs of general public
            interest. The discussion on a resolution is
            strictly releva nt to and withi n the scope of
            the resolution. A me mbe r who has moved
            a resolution or amendment to a resolution
            cannot withdraw the same except by leave of
            the House.

            A resolutio n may have the fo llowing objec-
            tives:
                (i) A d ec laration of opinion or a
                recom mendat io n.
                
                (ii) To record e ither approval or disa pproval
                by the I -louse of an act or policy of the
                government.
                
                (iii) Convey a message or commend, urge or
                request a n action .
                
                (iv) Call attention to a matter or situation for
                considera tion by the government.

            Reso lu t ion s are classi fi ed into t hree
            categories (Dictionary or Co nstitutional and Parliame ntary Terms, Lok Sabha Secrctariat, Sccond Edi tion,:WO S, pr. 396-97.): 

                1. Private Member's Resolution: It is one
                that is moved by a private member
                (other than a minister). It is discussed
                only on a lternate Fridays a nd in the
                afternoon sitting.

                2. Government Resolution: It is one that is
                moved by a minister. It is of the follow-
                ing three kinds:
                    (a) Resolutions approving international
                    treaties, conventions or agreements
                    of which the govern ment is a party.
                    (b) Resolutions decla ring or approving
                    certain policies of the government.
                    (c) Resol utions approving recommenda-
                    tions of certain committees.

                3. Statutory Resolution: It can be moved
                either by a pri vate me mber or a minis-
                ter. It is so ca lled beca use it is in pursu-
                ance of a provision in the Constitution
                or a n Act of Parliament.

            Resolutions are di ffere nt from motions in
            the fo llowi ng respects:
                "All resolutions come 111 the category
                of substa ntive motions, that is to say,
                every resolution is a particular type of
                mot ion. All motions need not necessa r-
                ily be substantive. Further, all motions
                are not necessarily put to vote of the
                House, whereas a ll the resolutions a rc
                requi red to be voted upon"
                    - Subhash C. K :lshya p: Our Parliament, Nu tional
                    Book Trust, 1999 Edition, p. 139.

        Youth Parliament
            The sche me of Youth Parlia ment waS started
            on the recommendation of the Fourth All
            India Whips Confere nce. Its objectives are:
                1. to acqua int the younger generations with
                practices and procedures of Parliament;
                
                2. to imbibe the spirit of discipline and
                lO lerancc cultivating character in the
                minds of youth; and
                
                3 . to inculcate in the student commun ity
                the basic values of democracy a nd to
                e nable them to acquire a proper perspec-
                tive on the function ing of democratic
                institutions.

            The ministry of pa rliamen tary affairs pro-
            vides necessary tra ining and encouragement
            to the states in introducing the scheme.

    EGISLATIVE PROCEDURE IN PARLIAMENT
        The legislative procedure is identical in both
        the Houses of Parliament. Every bill has to
        pass through the same stages in each Ho.use.
        f\ bill is a proposal fo r legislation a nd it
        becomes an act or law when duly enacted.

        The bills introduced in the Parliament are
        of two kinds: public bills and private bills
        (also known as government bills and private
        members' bil1s respectively). Though both are
        governed by the same general procedure and
        pass through the same stages in the House,
        they differ in various respects as shown in
        Table 23.3.

        Depending on their content, the bills may
        further be classified into:
            (a) Original bills (bills embodying new pro-
            posals, ideas or policies);
            
            (b) Amending bills (bil1s which seek to mod-
            ify, a mend or revise the existing Acts);
            
            (c) Consolidating bills (bills which seek to
            consolidate existing laws on a particular
            subject);
            
            (d) Expiring Laws (Continuance) bills (bills
            to continue an expiring Act);
            
            (e) Repealing bills (bills seeking to repeal
            , existing Acts);
            
            (f) Validating bills (bills which seek to give
            validity to certain actions).
            
            (g) Bills to replace Ordinancesj
            
            (h) Constitution (Amendment) bills; and
            
            (i) Money a nd Financial bills.

        On the basis of procedure required for their
        passage in the Parliament, the bills can also
        be broadly classified into the following four
        types:
            1. Ordinary bills, which are con cerned
            with any matter other than financial
            subjects.

            2. Money bills, which are concerned with
            the financial matters like taxation, pub~
            lic expenditure, etc.
            
            3. Financial bills, which are also concerned
            with financial matters (but are different
            from money bills).
            
            4. Constitution amendment bills, which are
            concerned with the amendment of the
            provisions of the Constitution .

        The Constitution has laid down separate
        procedures for the enactment of. all the four
        types of bills, The procedures with regard to
        ordinary bills, money bills and financial bills
        are explained here. The procedure with regard
        to Constitution amendment bills is already
        explained in detail.

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 23.3 Public Bm vs Private Bill
Public Bill Private Bill
1. It is Introduced in the Parliament by a minister.
1. It is Introduced by any member of Parliament other
than a minister.
2. It reflects of the policies of the government.
~,.....- ......,._.
2. It does not reflect the stand of government on public
matter.
3. It has greater chance to be approved by the
Parliament.
3. It has lesser chance to be approved by the
Parliament.
,
. Its rejection by the House amounts to the expres-
sion of want of parliamentary confidence in the
government and may lead to Its resignation.
5. Its introduction in the House requires seven days'
notice,
- -
-
. .
-.,.-,~
6. It is drafted by the concerned department.ln con·
sultation with the law department.
4. Its rejection by the House has no Implication on the
parliamentary confidence In the government or its
resignation.
5. Its introduction in the House requires one month's
notice.
6, Its drafting is the responsibility of the member
concerned.
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

        Ordinary Bills
            Every ordina ry bill has to pass through the
            following five stages in the Pa rlia ment before
            it finds a place on the Statute Book:

                1. First Reading An ordina ry bill ca n be
                introduced in either House of Parliam en t.
                Such a biB ca n be introduced either by a m in-
                ister or by any other member. The member
                who wants to introduce the bill has to ask for
                the leave of the House. When the House grants
                leave to introduce the bill, the mover of the bill
                introduces it by reading its title and objectives.
                No d iscussion on the bill takes place at th is
                stage. Later, the bill is published in the Gazette
                of India. If a bill is published in the Gazette
                before its introduction, leave of the House to
                introduce the bill is not necessary, The intro-
                duction of the bill a nd its publication in the
                Gazette constitute the first readin g of the bill.
                    - Under Rule 64 of Lok Sabha, the Speaker may, on
                    request being made to him, order the publication
                    of any bill in the Gazette, although no motion has
                    been made for leave to introduce the bill. In that
                    case, it shall not be necessary to move for leave to
                    introduce the bill and if the bill is afterwards intro-
                    duced, it shall not be necessary to publish it aga in.

                2. Second Reading During this stage, the
                bill receives not only the general but also the
                detailed scrutiny and assumes its fi nal shape.
                Hence, it for ms the most importa nt stage in
                the en actment of a bill. In fa ct, th is stage
                involves three more sub-stages, namely, stage
                of general discussion, committee stage and
                consideration stage.
                    (a) Stage a /General Discussion The p rinted
                        copies of the bill are distributed to all the
                        me mbers. The princi ples of the bill a nd its
                        provisio ns are discussed generally, but the
                        details of the bill are not discussed.
                        At this stage, the House can take a nyone
                        of the following four actions:
                            (i) It may take the bill into consideration
                            immediately or on some other fixed date;
                            (ii) It may refer the bill to a select comm ittee
                            of the House;

                            (iii) It may refer the bill to a joint committee
                            of the two Houses; and
                            (iv) It may ci rculate the bill to elicit public
                            opinio n.
                            
                        A Select Committee consists of members of
                        the House where the bi1l has originated and a
                        joint committee consists of members of both
                        the Houses of Parlia men t.
                    
                    (b) Committee Stage T he usual practice is
                        to refer the bill to a select comm ittee of the
                        House. This committee exa mines the bill
                        tho roughly a nd in detail, clause by cla use.
                        It can also am en d its provisions, but without
                        a ltering the p rinciples underly in g it. After
                        comple tin g the scrutiny and discussio n ,
                        the comm ittee repor ts the bill back to the
                        Ho use.

                    (c) Consideration Stage The House, after
                        receiving the bill fro m the select committee ,
                        considers the provisio ns of the bill clause by
                        cla use. Each clause is discussed a nd voted
                        upon separately. The members can also move
                        a mendments an d if accepted, they becom e
                        pa rt of the bill.

                3. Third Reading At this stage, the debate
                    is confined to the accep tance or rejection of
                    the bill as a whole and no am endments are
                    allowedl as the gen eral principles underlying
                    the bill have already been scrutinised during
                    the stage of second reading. If the majority of
                    members p'resent an d voting accept the bill ,
                    the bill is regarded as passed by the House.
                    Thereafter, the bill is a uthen ticated by the
                    presiding officer of the House and tra nsmit-
                    ted to the second House fo r consideration
                    and approvaL A bill is deemed to have been
                    passed by the Parlia ment o nly when both
                    the Houses have agreed to it, either with or
                    without am endments.

                4. Bill in the Second House In the second
                    House also, the bill passes through a ll the
                    three stages, that is, first reading, seco nd
                    reading a nd third reading. There a re four
                    alternatives before this House:
                        (a) it may pass the bil1 as sent by the first
                        house ( ie, without a me ndmen ts);
                        (b) it may pass the bill with amendments
                        and return it to the first House for
                        reconsideration;
                        (e) it may reject the bill altogether; and
                        (d) it may not take any action and thus keep
                        the bill pending.
                        
                    If the second House passes the bill without
                    any amendments or the first House accepts the
                    amendments suggested by the second House,
                    the bill is deemed to have been passed by both
                    the Houses and the same is sent to the President
                    for his/ her assent. On the other hand, if the
                    first House rejects the amendments suggested
                    by the second House or the second House
                    rejects the bill altogether or the second House
                    does not take any action for six months, a dead-
                    lock is deemed to have taken place. '1b resolve
                    such a deadlock, the President can summon a
                    joint sitting of the two Houses. If the majority
                    of members present and voting in the joint
                    sitting approves the bill, the bill is deemed to
                    have been passed by both the Houses.

                5. Assent of the President Every bill after
                    being passed by both Houses of Parliament
                    either singly or at a joint sitting, is presented
                    to the President for his/ her assent. There are
                    three alternatives before the President:
                    (a) he/ she may give his/her assent to the
                    bill; or .
                    (b) he/ she may withhold his/ her assent to
                    the bill; or
                    (c) he/ she may return the bill for reconsid-
                    eration of the Houses.

                    If the President gives his/ her assent to the
                    bill, the bill becomes an act and is placed on
                    the Statute Book. If the President withholds
                    his/ her assent to the bill, it ends and does
                    not be
                    co~e an act. If the President returns
                    the bill for reconsideration and if it is passed
                    by both the Houses again with or without
                    amendments and presented to the President
                    for his/ her assent, the President must give
                    his/ her assent to the bill. Thus, the President
                    enjoys only a "suspensive veto."

    Money Bill
        Article 110 of the Constitution deals with the
        definition of money bills. It states that a bill
        Parliament 'tt 247
        is deemed to be a money bill if it contains
        'only' provisions dealing with all or any of
        the following matters:

            1. The imposition, abolition, remission,
            alteration or regulation of any tax;

            2. The regulation of the borrowing of money
            by the Union government;
            
            3. The custody of the Consolidated Fund of
            India or the contingency fund of India,
            the payment of moneys into or the with-
            drawal of money from any such fund;
            
            4. The appropriation of money out of the
            Consolidated Fund of India;
            
            5. Declaration of any expenditure charged
            on the Consolidated Fund of India or
            increasing the amount of any such
            expenditure;
            
            6. The receipt of money on account of the
            Consolidated Fund of India or the public
            account of India or the custody or issue of
            such money, or the audit of the accounts
            of the Union or of a state; or
            
            7. Any matter incidental to any of the mat-
            ters specified above.
            
        However, a bill is not to be deemed to be a
        money bill by reason only that it provides for:
            1. the imposition of fines or other pecuniary
            penalties, or
            
            2. the demand or payment of fees for
            licenses or fees for services rendered; or
            
            3. the imposition, abolition, remission,
            alteration or regulation of any tax by any
            local authority or body for local purposes.

        If any question arises whether a bill is a
        money bill or not, the decision of the Speaker
        of the Lok Sabha is final. His/ her decision in
        this regard cannot be questioned in any court
        of law or in the either House of Parliament or
        even the President. When a money bill is trans-
        mitted to the Rajya Sabha for recommendation
        and presented to the President for assent, the
        Speaker endorses it as a money bill.

        The Constitution lays down a special pro-
        cedure for the passing of money bills in the
        Parliament. A money bill can only be intro-
        duced in the Lok Sabha and that top on the
        recommendation of the President. Every such
        bill is considered to be a government bill and
        can be introduced only by a minister

        After a mo ney bill is passed by the Lok
        Sabha, it is transm itted to the Rajya Sabha
        for its consideratio n. The R..:'ljya Sabha has
        restricted powers with regard to a money
        bi ll. It ca nnot reject or amend a money bill.
        It ca n only make the recomm endations. It
        must return the bill to the Lok Sabha within
        14 days, whether with or without recommen-
        dations. The Lok Sabha ca n either accept or
        reject all or any of the recommendations of
        the Rajya Sabha.

        If the Lok Sabha accepts any recommen-
        dation, the bill is then deemed to have been
        passed by both the Houses in the modified
        form . If the Lok Sabha does not accept any
        recommendatio n, the bill is then deemed to
        have passed by both the Houses in the form
        originally passed by the Lok Sabha without
        any change.

        If the Rajya Sabha does not return the
        bill to the Lok Sabha within 14 days, the bill
        is deemed to have been passed by both the
        Houses in the form origi nally passed by the
        Lok Sabha. Thus, the Lok Sabha has more pow-
        ers tha n Raj ya Sabha with regard to a money
        bill. On the other hand, both the Houses have
        equa l powers with regard to an ordinary bill.

        Fi nally, when a money bill is prese nted to
        the President, he/ she may either g ive his/
        her assent to the bill or withhold h is/ her
        assent to the bill but cannot return the bill
        for reconsideratio n of the Houses. Norma lly,
        the President gives his/ her assent to a money
        bill as it is introduced in the Pa rliame nt with
        his/ her prior permission.

        Thble 23.4 shows the differences between
        the procedures fo r the enactm ent of ordinary
        bi lls and m oney bills.

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 23.4 Ordinary Bill vs Money Bill
Ordinary Bill Money Bill
1. II can be Introduced either In the l ok Sabha or the Rajya Sabha. 1. it can be introduced only in the l ok Sabha and
not in the Rajya Sabha.
2. It can be Introdut::ed either by a minister Of by a prj. vate member.
2. It can be Intlodllced only by • minister.
3. It Is introduced without the recommendation of the President. of the President.
3. It can be Introduced only on the recommendation
4. It can be amended or rejected by the Rajya Sabha. 4. It cannot be amended or rejected by the RaJye
Sebha, The Rawa 5abha should retum the bPI
wtth or without recommendations. which may be
accepted or rejected by the Lok Sabha.
5. It can be detained by the R ajya Sabha for a maxi-
mum period of 1 4 days only.
6. It requires the cerUflcaUon of the Speaker when
transmlned to the Rajya Sabha.
5. It can be detained by the Rajya Sabha for a maximum period of six months. 6. It does not require the certification of the Speaker when transmitted to the Raga Sabha (If it has orIgi- nsted In the lok Sabha).
7. It Is sent for the President's assent only after being approved by both the Houses. In case of a deadlock due to disagreement between the two Houses, a joint sitting of both the houses can be summoned by the President to resolve the deadlock. ·S. its defeat in the lok Sabha may lead to the resignation of the govemment (If it is Introduced by a minister). 9. It can be approved or rejected or returned for recon- slderation by the President. 7. It is sent for the President's assent even If It Is
approved by only lok Sabha. There is no chance
of any disagreement between the two Houses
and hence, there is no provision of joint sitting of
both the Houses in this rega rd.
S. Its defeat in the lok Sabha leads to the reSlgne-
tlon of the government.
9. It can be approved or rejected but cannot be
returned for reconsideration by the President.
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

        Financial Bills
            Financial bills are those bills that deal with
            fiscal matters, that is, revenue or expendi-
            ture. However, the Constitution uses the term
            'financial bill' in a technical sense. Financial
            bills are of three kinds:
                1. Money bills- Article 110
                2. Financial bills (I)-Article 11 7 ( I)
                3. Financial bills (II)-Article 117 (3)

            This classification implies that mon ey
            biBs a re simply a species of financial bills.
            Hence, all money bills are financial bills but
            all financial biBs are not money bills. Only
            those financial bi11s are money bills which
            contain exclusively those matters which are
            mentioned in Article 110 of the Constitution.
            These are also certified by the Speaker of Lok
            Sabha as money bills. The financial bills (I)
            and (II), on the other hand, have been dealt
            with in Article 117 of the Constitution.

            Financial Bills (I) A financial bill (I) is a
            bill that contains not only any or all the mat-
            ters mentioned in Article 110, but also other
            matters of general legislation. For instance,
            a bill that contains a borrowing clause, but
            does not exclusively deal with borrowing. In
            two resp~cts, a financial bill (I) is similar
            to a money bill -(a) both of them ca n be
            introduced only in the Lok Sabha and not
            in the Rajya Sabha, and (b) both of them
            can be introduced only on the recommenda-
            tion of the President. In all other respects,
            a financiai bill (1) is governed by the sa me
            legislative procedure applicable to an ordi-
            nary bill. Hence, it ca n be either rejected
            or amended by the Rajya Sabha (except that
            an amendment other than for reduction
            or abo1ition of a tax cannot be moved in
            the Rajya Sabha or in the Lok Sabha with-
            out the recommendation of the President
            i.e., the recommendation of President is
            not required for moving an amendment
            making proviSion for the reduction or abo-
            lition of a tax). In case of a disagreement
            between the two Houses over such a bill, the
            President can summon a joint Sitti ng of the
            two Houses to resolve the deadlock. When
            the bill is presented to the President, he/ she
            Parliament '!1 249
            can either give his/ her assent to the bilI or
            withhold his/ her assent to the bill or return
            the bill for reconsideration of the Houses.

            Financial Bitts (II) A financial bill (II) con-
            tains provisions involving expenditure from
            the Consolidated Fund of India, but does not
            include any of the matters mentioned in
            Article 110. It is treated as an ordinary bill
            and in all respects, it is governed by the same
            legislative procedure which 'is applicable to
            an ordinary bill. The only special feature of
            this bill is that it cannot be passed by either
            House of Parliament unless the President has
            recommended to that House the consider-
            ation of the bill, Hence, financial bill (11) can
            be introduced in either House of Parliament
            and recommendation of the President is
            not necessary for its introduction, In other
            words, the recommendation of the President
            is not required at the introduction stage but is
            required at the consideration stage. It cim be
            either rejected or amended by either House
            of Parliament. In case of a .disagreement
            between the two Houses over such a bill, the
            President can summon a joint sitting of
            the two Houses to resolve the deadlock. When
            the bill is presented to the President, he/ she
            can either give his/ her assent to the bill or
            withhold his/her assent to the bill or return
            the bill for reconsideration of the Houses.

    JOINT SITTING OF TWO HOUSES
        Joint sitting is an extraordinary machinery
        provided by the Constitution to resolve a dead-
        lock between the two Houses over the passage
        of a bill. A deadlock is deemed to have taken
        place under a nyone of the following three
        situations after a bill has been passed by one
        House and transmitted to the other House:

            1. if the bill is rejected by the other House;

            2. if the Houses have finally di~greed as to
            the amendments to be made in the bill;
            or
            
            3. if more than six months have elapsed
            from the date of the receipt of the bill by
            the other House without the bill being
            passed by it.

        In the above three situations, the Presi-
        dent can summon both the Ho uses to meet
        in a joi nt sitting for the purpose of delib-
        erati ng a nd voting on the bill. It must be
        n oted he re that the provi sion of joint sitting
        is applicable to ordinary bills or financial
        bills on ly and not to money bills or Con-
        stitutional ame ndme n t bills. In the case of
        a money bi1l, the Lok Sabha has overriding
        powers, wh ile a Constitutional amendment
        bill must be passed by each I -louse separately.

        In reckoning the period of six months, no
        acco unt ca n be ta ken of any period during
        which the other House (to which the bill
        has been sent) is prorogued or adjourned for
        m ore than four co nsecutive days.

        If the bil1 ( under dis pute) has a lready
        lapsed due to the disso lution of the Lok
        Sabha, no j oi n t sitting ca n be su mmoned.
        But, the joint sitting can be held if the Lok
        Sabha is dissolved after the Preside nt has
        notified his/ her intention to summ on such
        a sitting (as the bill does not lapse in th is
        case). After the President notifies his/ her
        intention to su mmon a join t sitting of the
        two Houses, none of the Houses ca n proceed
        further with the bill.

        The Speaker of Lo k Sabha presides over a
        joi nt sitting of the two Houses and the Deputy
        Speaker, in his/ her absence. If the Deputy
        Speaker is also absent from a joint sitting, the
        Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha presides. rf
        he/ she is also absent, such other person as
        may be determined by the members present at
        the joint sitting, presides over the meeting. It
        is d ear that the Chairman of Rajya Sabha does
        not preside over a joint sitting as he/ she is not
        a member of either House of Parliament.

        The quorum to constitute a joint sitting is
        one-tenth of the total number of members of
        the two Houses. The joint sitting is governed
        by the Rules of Procedure of Lok Sabha and
        not of Rajya Sabha.

        If the bilJ in dispute is passed by a majority of
        the total number of members of both the Houses
        present and voting in the joint sitting, the bilJ is
        deemed to have been passed by both the Houses.
        Normally, the Lok Sabha with greater number
        wi ns the battle in a joint sitting.

        The Constitution has specified that a t a
        joint sitting, new amend men ts to the b ill
        ca nnot be proposed except in two cases:

            1. those amendmen ts that have caused fi nal
            d isagreement between the Houses; a nd

            2. t hose amendments that might have
            becom e necessary due to the delay in
            the passage of the bill.

        Since 1950, the provision regarding the
        joint si tting of the two Houses has bee n
        in voked only thrice. The bills that have been
        passed at joint sittings a rc:
            1. DOWTY Prohibition Bill, 1960.
            
            2. Banking Service Commissio n ( Repeal)
            Bill , 1977
            
            3. Prevention of Terrorism Bill, 2002

    BUDGET IN PARLIAMENT
        The Constitution refers to the budget as the
        'a nnual fi nancial statement'. In other words,
        the term 'budget' has nowhere been used in
        the Constitution. It is the popular name for the
        'a nnual financial statement' that has been de.:'l lt
        with in Article 112 of the Constitution.

        The budget is a statement of the estimated
        receipts and expenditure of the Government
        of India in a finan cial year, which begins on
        1 April a nd ends on 31 March of the fo llow-
        ing yea r.

        In addition to the estima tes of receipts
        and expenditure, the budget contains certain
        other ele ments. Overall, the budget contai ns
        the following:
            1. Estimates of revenue a nd capit.:'lI receipts;

            2. Ways a nd means to raise the revenue;

            3. Estimates of expenditure;

            4. Details of the actual receipts and expen-
            diture of the closing financial year and
            the reasons for any deficit or surplus in
            that year; and

            5. Economic and financial policy of the com-
            ing year, that is, taxation proposals, pros-
            pects of revenue, spending programme
            and introduction of new schemes/ projects.

        Merger of Railway Budllet

            Till 2017, the Government .of India had two
            budgets, namely, the Railway Budget and the
            General Budget. While the fonner consisted of
            the estimates of receipts and expenditures of
            only the Ministry of Railways, the latter con-
            sisted of the estimates of receipts and expen-
            diture of all the ministries of the Government
            of India (except the railways).

            The Railway Budget was separated from
            the General Budget in 1924 on the recom-
            mendations of the Acworth Committee Report
            (1921). The reasons or objectives of this sepa-
            ration were as follows:

                1. To introduce flexibility in railway finance.
                
                2. To facilitate a business approach to the
                railway policy.
                
                3. To secure stability of the general revenues
                by providing an assured annual contri-
                bution from railway revenues.
                
                4. To enable the railways to keep their prof-
                its for their own development (after
                paying a fixed annual contribution to
                the general revenues).

            In 2017, the Central Government merged
            the railway budget into the general budget.
            Hence, there is now only one budget for
            the Government of India i.e., Union Budget.

        Constitutional Provisions

            The Constitution of India contains the follow-
            ing provisions with regard to the enactment
            of budget:

                1. The President shall in respect of every
                financial year cause to be laid before
                both the Houses of Parliament a state-
                ment of estimated receipts and expendi-
                ture of the Government of India for that
                year (Article 112).

                2. No demand for a grant shall be made
                except on the recommendation of the
                President (Article 113).

                3. No money shall be withdrawn from the
                Consolidated Fund of India except under
                appropriation made by law (Article 114).
                
                4. No money bill imposing tax shan be
                introduced in the Parliament except on
                the recommendation of the President,
                and such a bill shall not be introduced
                in the Rajya Sabha (Article 117).
                
                5. No tax shaH be levied or collected except
                by authority of law (Article 265).
                
                6. Parliament can reduce or abolish a tax
                but cannot increase it (Article 117).
                
                7. The Constitution has also defined the
                relative roles or position of both the
                Houses of Parliament with regard to
                the enactment of the budget in the
                following way:
                    (a) A money bill or finance bill dealing
                    with taxation cannot be introduced
                    in the Rajya Sabha-it must be
                    introduced only in the Lok Sabha
                    (Article 109).
                    (b) The ~jya Sabha has no power to vote
                    on the demand for grants; it is the
                    exclusive privilege of the Lok Sabha
                    (Article 113).
                    (c) The Rajya Sabha should return the
                    Money bill (or Finance bill) to the
                    Lok Sabha withiI1- fourteen days.
                    The Lok Sabha can either accept
                    or reject the recommendations
                    made by Rajya Sabha in this regard
                    (Article 109).

                8. The estimates of expenditure embodied
                in the budget shall show separately the
                expenditure charged on the Consolidated
                Fund of India and the expenditure made
                from the Consolidated Fund of India
                (Article 112).

                9. The budget shall distinguish expenditure
                on revenue account from other expen-
                diture (Article 112).
                
                10. The expenditure charged on the
                Consolidated Fund of India shall not
                be submitted to the vote of Parliament.
                However, it ca n be d iscussed by the
                Parl iament (Articl e 113).

                11 . The Lok Sabha can approve or refuse any
                de mand or red uce the am ount specified
                in the demand bu t ca nnot increase it
                (Article 113).

                12. No such a men dment ca n be proposed to
                the a ppropriation bill in either House of
                the Parliament that will have the effect
                of vary ing the a mou nt or alter ing the
                destination of any grant voted, or of
                varying the a mount of any expenditure
                changed on the Consolidated F'und of
                India (Article 114).

                13. The Lok Sablw ca n ma ke a ny grant in
                adva nce (Vote on Account) in respect to
                the estimated expenditure for a part of
                the financia l year, pending the co mple·
                tion of th e voting of rhe de mands for
                gra nts a nd the enactment of the appro·
                priation bill (Ar ticle 116).

        Charged Expenditure
            The budget cons ists of two types of expendi-
            tu re -the expe nditure 'charged' upon the Con-
            solidated Fund of India a nd the expend iture
            ' made' from the Consol idated Fund of India.
            The charged expenditure is non-votable by th e
            Parliament, that is, it ca n only be discussed
            by the Parliament, while the other type has
            to be voted by the Parliament. The list of the
            charged expenditure is as follows:
                1. Emo luments and allowances o f the
                President and other expenditure relating
                to his/ her o ffi ce.

                2. Sala ries a nd al1 0wances of the Chairman
                and the De puty Cha irman of the Raj ya
                Sabha a nd the Spea ker and the De puty
                Speaker of the Lok Sabha.
                
                3 . Salaries, a llowances and pensions of the
                judges of the Supreme Court.
                
                4 . Pensions of the judges of high courts.
                
                5. Sa lary, a llowances and pension of the
                Comptroller and Auditor General of Indja.
                
                6. Salaries, allowa nces a nd pension of the
                ch airman and members of the Union
                Publi c Service Commiss io n.
                
                7. Administra tive expenses of the Supreme
                Cou rt, th e office of th e Comptroll er
                a nd Auditor Gen eral of Ind ia and the
                Uni o n Publi c Se rv ice Co mmissio n
                including the sa laries, a ll owances a nd
                pe n sio n s of th e pe rso ns se rving in
                these offi ces.
                
                8. T h e d e bt c h arges for whic h the
                Governme nt of India is liable, in cl ud-
                ing interest, sinking fund charges and
                redemption cha rges and other expe nd i·
                ture relati ng to the raising of loa ns and
                the service a nd redemption of debt.
                
                9. Any sum required to satisfy any j udge-
                ment, decree or award of an y court or
                arb itra l tribunal.
                
                10. Any other expend itu re declared by the
                Parliament to be so charged.

        Stages in Enactment
            The budget goes through the fo llowi ng six
            stages in the Parlia ment:
                1. Presentation of budget.
                2. General discussion .
                3. Scrutiny by de partmen ta l committees.
                4. Voti ng on demands for gran ts.
                5. Passing of appropriation bill.
                6. Passing of finance bill.

            1. Presentat ion of Budget Conventionally,
                the budget is presen ted to the Lok Sabha by
                the finan ce minister on the last working day
                of February. Si nce 20 17, the p resen tation
                of the budget has been adva nced to 1st o f
                February.

                The Budget ca n also be presen ted to the
                House in two or more parts and when such
                presentatio n takes place, each part sha ll be
                dea lt with as if it were the budget. Fu rther,
                there shall be no discussion of the budget
                on the day o n which it is presented to the
                House.

                The finance minister presents the budget
                with a speech known as the 'budget speech '.
                At the end of the speech in the Lok Sabha, the
                budget is la id before the R.,1j ya Sabha, which
                ca n on ly discuss it a nd has no power to vote
                0 11 the demands for grants.

                The budget documents presented to the
                Parliament comprise of the following (Budget Manual, Ministry of Finance, Government of India, November 2022, pp. 2- 3.):

                    (i) Budget Speech
                    
                    (ii) Annual Financial Statement
                    
                    (iii) Demands for Grants
                    
                    (iv) Finance Bill
                    
                    (v) Statements mandated under the FRBM Act (The Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Manage-
ment Act, 2003 was enacted to provide for the re-
sponsibiity of the central government to ensure
inter-generational equity in fiscal management
and long-term macro-economic stability):
                        (a) Macro-Economic Framework
                        Statement
                        (b) Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement
                        (c) Medium Term Fiscal Policy
                        Statement
                    (vi) Expenditure Budget
                    
                    (vii) Receipts Budget
                    
                    (viii) Expenditure Profile
                    
                    (ix) Memorandum Explaining the Provisions in the Finance Bill
                    
                    (x) Budget at a Glance
                    
                    (xi) Outcome Budget (Output Outcome
                    Monitoring Framework)
                    
                    (xii) Key Features of the Budget
                    
                    (xiii) Implementation of Previous Budget
                    Announcements
                    
                    (xiv) Key to Budget Documents

                Earlier, the Economic Survey also used to
                be presented to the Parliament along with the
                budget. Now, it is presented one day or a few
                days before the presentation of the budget. This
                report is prepared by the finance ministry and
                indicates the status of the national economy.

            2. General Discussion The general discus-
                sion on budget begins a few days after its pre-
                sentation. It takes place in both the Houses
                of Parliament and lasts usually for three to
                four days.

                During this stage, the Lok Sabha can dis-
                cuss the budget as a whole or on any ques-
                tion of principle involved therein but no cut
                motion can be moved nor can the budget
                be submitted to the vote of the House. The
                finance minister has a general right of reply
                at the end of the discussion.

            3. Scrutiny by Departmental Committees
                After the general discussion on the budget
                is over, the Houses are adjourned for about
                three to four weeks. During this gap period,
                the 24 departmental standing committees of
                Parliament examine and discuss in detail the
                demands for grants of the concerned min-
                isters and prepare reports on them. These
                reports are submitted to both the Houses of
                Parliament for consideration.
                
                The standing committee system estab-
                lished in 1993 (and expanded in 2004) makes
                parliamentary financial control over minis-
                tries much more detailed, close, in-depth and
                comprehensive.

            4. Voting on Demands for Grants In the light
                of the reports of the departmental standing
                committees, the Lok Sabha takes up voting
                of demands for grants. The demands are pre-
                sented ministrywise. A demand becomes a
                grant after it has been duly voted.

                Two points should be noted in this context.
                One, the voting of demands for grants is the
                exclusive privilege of the Lok Sabha, that is,
                the Rajya Sabha has no power of voting the
                demands. Second, the voting is confined to
                the votable part of the budget-the expen-
                diture charged on the Consolidated Fund of
                India is not submitted to the vote (it can only
                be discussed).

                Each demand is voted separately by the Lok
                Sabha. During this stage, the members of Par·
                liament can discuss the details of the budget.
                They can also move motions to reduce any
                demand for grant. Such motions are called as
                'cut motion', which are of three kinds:
                    (a) Policy Cut Motion It represents the
                    disapproval of the policy underlying the
                    demand. It states that the amount of the de-
                    mand be reduced to 1 rupee. The members can also
                    advocate an alternative policy.

                    (b) Economy Cut Motion It represents the
                    economy that can be affected in the proposed
                    expenditure. It states that the amount of the
                    demand be reduced by a specified amount
                    (which may be either a lumpsum reduction
                    in the demand or om mission or reduction of
                    an item in the demand).

                    (c) Token Cut Motion It ven tilates a specific
                    grievance that is wi thin the sphere of respon-
                    sibility of the Government of India . It states
                    that the a mount of the demand be reduced
                    by 1OO .

                A cut motion, to be admissible, 111ust satisfy
                the following conditions:
                    (i) It should relate to one demand only.
                    
                    (ii) It should be clearly expressed a nd
                    should not conta in a rgum e nts o r
                    defamatory stateme nts.
                    
                    (iii) It should be confined to o ne specific
                    matter.
                    
                    (iv) It should not make suggestion s for the
                    amendment or repeal of existing laws.
                    
                    (v) it should not refe r to a matter that is
                    not primari1 y the con cern of Union
                    government.
                    
                    (vi) It should not relate to the expenditure
                    charged on the Consolidated Fund of
                    India.
                    
                    (vii) It should not relate to a matte r that is
                    under adj udication by a court.
                    
                    (viii) rt should not rai se a ques tion o f
                    privilege.

                The signi fica nce of a cut motion lies in:
                (a) facilitating the initiation of concentrated
                discussion on a specific demand for grant;
                and (b) upholding the principle of respon-
                sible government by probing the acti vities of
                the government. However, the cut motion do
                not have much utility in practice. They are
                only moved and discussed in the House but
                not passed as the government e njoys major-
                ity support. Their passage by the Lok Sabha
                amounts to the expressions of want of parlia-
                mentary confidence in the governme nt a nd
                may lead to its resignation .

                On the last day of the days allotted for dis-
                cussion and voting on the demands for grants,
                the Speaker puts all the rem a ining demands
                to vote and disposes them whether they have
                been discussed by the members o r not. This
                is known as 'guillotine'.

            5. Passing of Appropriation Bill
                The Con stitution states that 'no money
                shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated
                Fund of India except unde r appropria tion made
                by law'. Accordingly, after the demands for
                gra nts a re voted on and passed by the Lok
                Sabha , a n appropri ation bill is introduced
                to provide for the appropriation , o ut o f the
                Consolidated Fund of India , of all money
                required to meet:
                    (a) The grants voted by the Lok Sabha.
                    (b) Th e ex penditure c harged on th e
                    Consolidated Fund of India .

                No such ame ndment ca n be proposed to
                the approp riation bill in either house of the
                Parli am ent that will have the effect of va ry-
                ing the a mount o r a ltering the destinatio n of
                a ny gra nt voted, or of va ry i ng the a mou nt of
                any ex penditure cha rged on the Consolidated
                fund of India.

                The Appropriation Bill becomes the Appro-
                priatio n Act after it is assented to by the
                President. This act authorises (o r Jegalises)
                the pay ments from the Consolidated Fund of
                Indiil . This mea ns that the government can-
                not withdraw mo ney from the Consolidated
                Fund of India tm the enactment of the appro-
                priation hill . This takes time a nd usuall y goes
                o n till the end of April. But the government
                needs mo ney to carry on its norma l activi-
                t ies after 31 March (the end of the fina ncia l
                year). Th overcom e this fun ctiona l difficulty,
                the Constitution has authorised the Lok Sabha
                to make any grant in advan ce in respect to
                the estimated ex penditure for a pa rt of the
                fin a ncial year, pending the completio n of
                the voting of the demands for grants and the
                enactment of the appropriation bill. This pro-
                vision is known as the 'Vote on Account'. It is
                passed (or granted) after the general di scus-
                sion on budget is over. It is generally gra nted
                for two mo nths fOT an amount equi vale nt to
                one-sixth o f the total estimation.

                In a n electi on yea r ( whe n the Lok Sabha
                is to be dissolved or a new Lok Sabha is con-
                stituted), the V ote on Account may be taken
                fo r a longer period (for about 3 to 5 months).
                from 201 7 onwa rds, th e Budget session
                is advanced to 31st January and the Union
                Budget is presented on 1st February, almost
                a month ahead of the usual date -in the past.
                This change is intended to enable the Parlia-
                ment to avoid a Vote on Account and pass a
                single Appropriation Bill for the year, before
                the close of the financial year.

                - After the advancement of budg~t cycle
                from the last day of February to the first day
                of February, the Vote on Account is presented
                in the election year when Interim Budget is
                presented.

                In the year in which General Elections to
                the Lok Sabha are held, the Interim Budget
                is presented to the Parliament. After the
                General Elections are over and assumption
                of office by the new government, the Regular
                Budget is presented to the Parliament on a
                date as decided by the new governme~t.

            6. Passing of Finance Bill The 'Finance Bill'
                means the bill ordinarily introduced in each
                year to give effect to the financial propos-
                als of the Government of India for the next
                financial Year, and includes a bill to give
                effect to supplementary financial proposals
                for any period. It is subjected to all the condi-
                tions applicable to a Money Bill. Unlike the
                Appropriation Bill, the amendments (seeking
                to reject or reduce a tax) can be moved in the
                case of finance bill.
                During this stage, a member can discuss
                matters relating to general administration,
                local grievances within the sphere of the
                responsibility of the Government of India or
                monetary or financial policy of th~ govern-
                ment.
                According to the Provisional Collection of
                Tones Act of 1931, the Finance Bill must be
                enacted (i.e., passed by the Parliament and
                assented to by the President) within 75 days.
                The Finance Act legalises the income side
                of the budget and completes the process of
                the enactment of the budget.

        Other Grants

            In addition to the budget that contains the
            ordinary estimates of income and expen-
            diture for one financial year, various other
            grants are made by the Parliament under
            extraordinary or special circumstances:

                Supplementary Grant It is granted when the
                amount authorised by the Parliament through
                the appropriation act for a particular service
                for the current financial year is found to be
                insufficient for that year.

                Additional Grant It is granted when a need
                has arisen during the current financial year for
                additional expendit~re upon some new set\'ice
                not contemplated in the budget for that year.

                Excess Grant It is granted when money has
                been spent on any service during a financial
                year in excess of the amount granted for that
                service in the budget for that year. It is voted
                by the Lok Sabha after the financial year.
                Before the demands for excess grants are
                submitted to the Lok Sabha for voting, they
                must be approved by the Public Accounts
                Committee of Parliament.

                Vote of Credit It is granted for meeting an
                unexpected demand upon the resources of
                India, when on account of the magnitude or
                the indefinite character of the service, the
                demand cannot be stated with the details
                ordinarily given in a budget. Hence, it is like
                a blank cheque given to the Executive by th~
                Lok Sabha. .

                Exceptional Grant It is granted for a special
                purpose and forms no part of the current
                service of any financial year.

                Token Grant It is granted when funds to
                meet the proposed expenditure on a new
                sen,ice ca n be made available by reappro-
                priation. A demand for the grant of a token
                sum is submitted to the vote of the Lok Sabha
                and if assented, funds are' made available.
                Reappropriation involves transfer of funds
                from one head to another. It does not involve
                any additional expenditure.

                Supplementary, additional, excess and
                exceptional -grants and vote of credit are
                regulated by the same procedure which is
                applicable in the case of a regular budget.

        Funds
            The Constitution of India provides for the
            following three kinds of fu nds for the Cen tral
            government:

                1. Consolidated Fund of India (Article 266)
                
                2. Public Account of India (Article 266)
                
                3 . Contingency Fund of lndia (Article 267)

            Consolidated fund of India It is a fund to
            which all receipts are credited and all pay-
            ments are debited. In other words, (a) all
            revenues received by the Government of
            India; (b) aJ110ans raised by the Government
            by the issue of treasury bills, loans or ways
            a nd means of advances; and (c) all money
            received by the government in repayment of
            loans forms the Consolidated Fund of India.
            All the legally authorised pay ments on behalf
            of the Government of India are made out of
            this fund. No money out of this fu nd can
            be appropriated (issued or drawn ) except in
            accordance with a parliamtmtary law.

            Public Account of India All other public
            money (other than those which are credited
            to the Consolidated Fund of India) received
            by or on behalf of the Government of India
            shall be credited to the Public Account of
            India. This includes provident fund depos-
            its, judicial deposits, savings bank deposits,
            departmental deposits, remittances and so on.
            This account is operated by executive action,
            that is, the payments from this account can
            by made without parliamentary appropria-
            tion. Such payments are mostly in the nature
            of banking transactions.

            Contingency Fund of India The Constitution
            authorised the Parliament to establish a
            'Contingency Fund of India', into which
            amounts determined by law are paid from
            time to time. Accordingly, the Parliament
            enacted the contingency fund of India Act in
            1950. This fund is IJ.laced at the disposal of the
            President, and he/ she can make adva nces out
            of it to meet unforeseen expenditure pending
            its authorisation by the Parliament. The fund
            is held by the finance secretary on behalf
            of the President. Like the public account of
            India, it is also operated by executive action.

    MULTIFUNCTIONAL ROLE OF PARLIAMENT
        In the 'Indian politico-administrative system',
        the Parliament occupies a central position
        and has a multifun ctional role. It enjoys
        extensive powers and performs a variety of
        functions towards the fulfilment of its con-
        stitutionally expected role. Its powers and
        functions can be classified uneler the follow~
        ing heads:
            1. Legislative Powers and Functions
            2. Executive Powers and Functions
            3. Financial Powers and Functions
            4. Constituent Powers and Functions
            5. Judicial Powers a nd functions
            6 . Electora l Powers a nd Functions
            7. Other powers and functions.

        1. Legislative Powers and Functions
            The primary function of Par1iament is to
            make laws for the governance of the country.
            It has exclusive power to make laws on the
            subjects enumerated in the Union List (which
            at present has 98 subjects, originally 97 sub-
            jects) and on the residuary subjects (that is,
            subjects not enumerated in any of th e three
            lists). With regard to Concurrent List (wh ich
            has at present 52 subjects, originally 47 sub-
            jects), the Parliament has overriding powers,
            that is, the law of Parliament prevails over
            the law of the state legislature in case of a
            conflict between the two.

            The Constitution also empowers the Parlia-
            ment to make Jaws on the subjects enumer-
            ated in the State List (which at present has
            59 subj ects, originally 66 subjects) under the
            following five abnormal circumstances:

                (a) when Rajya Sabha passes a resolution to
                that effect.
                
                (b) when a pro clamat ion of Na tional
                Emergen cy is in operation.
                
                (c) when two or more states make a joint
                request to the Parliament.

                (d) when necessary to give effect to inter-
                national agreements, treaties and
                conventions.

                (e) when President's Rule is in operation in
                the state.

            Al1 the ordin~nces issued by the President
            (during the recess of the Parliament) must be
            approved by the Parliament within six weeks
            after its reassembly. An ordinance becomes
            inoperative if it is not approved by the parlia-
            ment within that period.

            The Parliament makes laws in a skeleton
            form and authorises the Executive to m..,.ke
            detailed rules and regulations within th e
            framework of the parent law. This is known
            as delegated legislah"on or executive legislation
            or subordinate legislation. Such rules and
            regulations are placed before the Parliament
            for its examination.

        2. Executive Powers and Functions
            The Constitution of India establ ished a par-
            liamentary form of government in which the
            Executive is responsible to the Parliament for
            its policies and acts. Hence, the Parliament
            exercises control over the Executive through
            question-hour, zero hour, half-an-hour dis-
            cussion, short duration discussion, call ing
            attention motion, adjournment motion, no-
            confidence motion, censure motion and other
            discussions. It also supervises the activities of
            the Executive with the help of its committees
            like committee 'on government assurances,
            committee on subordinate legislation, com-
            mittee on petitions, etc.

            The ministers are collectively responsible
            to the Parliament in general and to the Lok
            Sabha in particular .. As a part of collective
            responsibility, there is individual responsi-
            bility, that is, each minister is individually
            responsible for the efficient administration
            of the ministry under his/her charge. This
            means that they continue in office so long
            as they enjoy the confidence of the majority
            members in the Lok Sabha. In other words,
            the council of ministers can be removed
            from office by the Lok Sabha by passing a
            no-confidence motion. The Lok Sabha can
            also express lack of confidence in the govern-
            ment in the following ways:

                (a) By not passing a motion of thanks on the
                President's inaugural address.
                (b) By rejecting a money hill.
                ( c) By passing a censure motion or an
                adjournment motion.
                (d) By defeating the government on a vital
                issue.
                (e) By passing a cut motion.

            Therefore, "the first function of Parliament
            can be said to be to select the group which is
            to form the government, support and sustain
            it in power so long as it enjoys its confidence,
            and to expel it when it ceases to do so, and
            leave it to the people to decide at the next
            general election."
                - N.N. Mallya: Indian Parliament, p. 39.

        3. Financial Powers and Functions
            No tax can be levied or collected and no expen·
            diture can be incurred by the Executive except
            under the authority and with the approval of
            ParHament. Hence, the budget is placed before
            the Parliament for its approval. The enactment
            of the budget by the Parliament legalises the
            receipts and expenditure of the government
            for the ensuing financial year.

            The Parliament also scrutinises govern-
            ment spending and financial performance
            with the help of its financial committees.
            These include public accounts committee,
            estimates committee and committee on pub·
            lie undertakings. They bring out the cases
            of megal, irregular, unauthorised, improper
            usage and wastage and extravagance in public
            expenditure.

            Therefore, the parliamentary control over
            the Executive in financial matters operates
            in two stages:

                (a) budgetary control, that is, control before
                the appropriation of grants through the
                enactment of the· budget; and

                (b) post·budgetary control , that is, con-
                trol after the appropriation of gran ts
                through the three financial committees

            The budget is ba sed on the princip le
            of annu ity, tha t is, the Parliament g rants
            money to the government for one fi nancial
            year. If the gra n ted mo ney is not spent by
            the end of the fi na ncial year, then the bal-
            ance expires and return s to the Co nsolidated
            Fund of India. Thi s practice is known as the
            'ru le of lapse'. It fa cil itates effective finan-
            cia l control by the Parliament as no reserve
            funds can be built without its authorisation .
            However, the observance of th is rul e leads to
            heavy rush of expendi ture towards the close
            of the financial year. This is popularly ca lled
            as 'March Rush'.

        4. Const ituent Powers and Functions
            The Parliament is vested with the powers
            to a m end the Co nstitution by way of addi-
            tio n , va ri ation or repea l of a ny provisio n.
            The major pa rt of the Constitution can be
            amended by the Parliament with specia l
            majority, that is, a majority of the total
            membersh ip of each House a nd a majority
            of not less than two-thirds of the members
            prese nt and voting in each House. So me
            other provisions of the Constitution can
            be amended by the Parliam ent with simple
            majority, that is, .a majority of the members
            prese n t and voting in each House of Parlia-
            ment. Only a few prov isio ns of the Consti-
            tution ca n be amended by the Parl iament
            (by special majority) a nd with the co nse nt
            of at least half of the State Legislatu res (by
            simpl e majority) . However, the power to
            initiate the process of the amend ment of
            the Const itution ( in a ll the three cases) lies
            exclusively in the hands of the Parliament
            and not th e state legisla ture. There is on ly
            one exception, that is, the state leg islature
            ca n pass a reso lu tio n request ing the Parlia-
            ment for the creatio n or abolitio n of the
            legislative council in the state. Based on the
            reso lution, the Pa rl iament makes an act for
            amendi ng the Co nsti tution to that effect.
            1b sum up, the Parliament ca n a mend the
            Const itu tion in three ways:
                (a) By si mple majority;
                (b) By special majority; and
                (c) By special majority but with the consent
                of half of all the state legislatures.
                
            The constitue nt power of the Parliament is
            not unli mited; it is subject to the 'basic struc-
            ture' of the Con stitution. In others words,
            the Parliament can amend any provision of
            the Constitution except the 'basic features'
            of the Constitution. This was ruled by the
            Supreme Court in the Kesavnanda Bharati
            case (Kesavnanda Bharati vs. State of Kerala, 1973)

        5. Judicial Powers and Functions
            The judicial powers a nd functions of the Par-
            li ament include the following:
                (a) It can impeach the President for the viola-
                tion of the Constitution.
                (b) It can remove the Vice-Presiden t from
                his/ her office.
                (c) It can recommend the removal of j udges
                ( includi ng chief justice) of the Supreme
                Court a nd the high courts, chief elec-
                tion co mmissio ner, state elect ion co m-
                missioner and comptroller and auditor
                genera l to the President.
                (d) I.t can punish its me mbers or outsiders
                for the breach of its privileges or its
                contempt.

        6. Electoral Powers and Functions
            The Parliament partic ipates in the election
            of the President (a long with the state legisla-
            tive assemblies) and elects the Vice-President.
            The Lok Sabha elects its Speaker and Deputy
            Speaker, wh ile the Rajya Sabha elects its
            Deputy Chairma n.

            The Parliament is also authorised to make
            laws to regulate the elections to the offices
            of President and Vice-President, to both the
            Houses of Parlia ment and to both the Houses
            of state legislature. Accordi ngly, Parliament
            enacted the Presidential and Vice-Presidential
            Elections Act (1952), the Representation of
            the People Act (1950), the Representation of
            the People Act (1951), etc.

        7. Other Powers and Functions
            The various othe.r powers and functions of the
            Parliament include:
                (a) It serves as the highest deliberative body
                in the country. It discusses various
                issues of national and international
                significance.

                (b) It approves all the three types of emer-
                gencies (national, state and financial)
                procla!med by the President.

                (c) It can create or abolish the state legislative
                councils on the recommendation of the
                concerned state legislative assemblies.

                (d) It ca~ increase or decrease the area, alter
                the boundaries and change the names of
                states of the Indian Union.

                (e) It can regulate the organisation and juris-
                diction of the Supreme Court and high
                courts and ~an establish a common high
                court for two or more states.

    INEFFECTIVENESS OF PARLIAMENTARY CONTROL
        The parliamentary control over government
        and administration in India is more theoreti-
        cal than practical. In reality, the control is
        not as effective as it ought to be. The fol1ow-
        ing factors are responsible for this: 

            (a) The Parliament has neither time nor
            expertise to control the administration
            which has grown in volume as well as
            complexity.

            (b) Parliament's financial control is hindered
            by the technical nature of the demands
            for grants. The parliamentarians being
            laymen cannot understand them prop-
            erly and fully.

            (c) The legislative leadership lies with the
            Executive and it plays a significant role
            in formulating policies.

            (d) The very size of the Parliament is too
            large and unmanagable to be effective.

            (e) The majority support enjoyed by the
            Executive in the Parliament reduces the
            possibility of effective criticism.

            (f) The financial committees like Public
            Accounts Committee examines the
            .public expenditure after it has been
            parliament~, 259
            incurrl;!d by the Executive. Thus, they do
            post mortem work.

            (g) The increased recourse to 'guillotine'
            reduced the scope of financial control.

            (h) The growth of 'delegated legislation' has
            reduced the role of Parliament in mak-
            ing detailed laws and has increased the
            powers of bureaucracy.

            (i) The frequent promulgation of ordinances
            by the President dilutes the Parliament's
            power of legislation.

            (j) The Parliament's control is sporadic,
            general and mostly political in nature.

            (k) Lack of strong and steady opposition in
            the Parliament, and a setback in the par-
            liamentary behaviour and ethics, have
            also contributed to the ineffectiveness of
            legislative control over adJ11inistration
            in India.

    POSITION OF RAJYA SABHA
        The Constitutional position of the Rajya
        Sabha (as compared with the Lok Sabha) can
        be studied from three angles:
            1. Where Rajya Sabha is equal to Lok Sabha.
            
            2. Where Rajya Sabha is unequal to Lok
            Sabha.
            
            3. Where Rajya Sabha has special powers that
            are not at all shared with the Lok Sabha .

        Equal Status with Lok Sabha
            In the following matters, the powers and
            status of the Rajya Sabha are equal to that of
            the Lok Sabha:·
                1. Introduction and passage of ordinary
                bills.

                2. Introduction and passage of Constitutional
                amendment bills.
                
                3. Introduction and passage of financial
                bills involving expenditure from the
                Consolidated Fund of India.
                
                4. Election and impeachment of the
                President.
                
                5. Election and , removal of the· Vice-
                President. However, Rajya Sabha alone
                can initiate the removal of the vice-Pres·
                ident. Hel she is removed- by a resolution
                passed by the 1 ~ 1j ya Sabha by a n effec~
                tive majority a nd agreed to by the Lok
                Sabha by a sim ple maj ority.
                
                6. Making recommendation to the President
                for th e remova l of Ch ief J ustice and
                j udges of Sup re me Court and hi gh
                courts, chief e lection comm issioner a nd
                comptroller a nd a ud itor ge neral.
                
                7. Approval of ord inances issued by the
                Preside nt.
                
                8. Approva l of procla mation of all three
                types of e mergenc ies by the President.
                
                9. Selection of mi niste rs includin g the
                Prime Min ister. Unde r the Co nstitution,
                the m i n iste rs i nc ludi ng t he Prim e
                Min ister can be me mbe rs of ei t he r
                House. However, irrespective of the ir
                me mbership, they are responsible on ly
                to the Lok Sabha .
                
                10. Consideration of the reports of the c O l1 s t i ~
                tutional bodies like Finance Com mission,
                Union Public Service Comm ission, comp-
                troller and a uditor general, etc.
                
                11. En largement of the jurisdiction of the
                Suprem e Court a nd the Un ion Public
                Service Com mission .

        Unequal Status with Lok Sabha
            In the fo ll owing ma tters, the powe rs and sta-
            tus of the Rilj ya Sabha are uneq ua l to that of
            the Lok Sabha :
                1. A Money Bill ca n be introduced only in
                the Lok Sabha and not in the Raj ya Sabha.
                
                2. Rajya Sabha cannot amend or reject a
                Money Bill. It should return the bill to
                the Lok Sabha withi n 14 days, eithe r
                with reco m me n dat io n s or with ou t
                recom mendatiolls.
                
                3. The Lok Sabha ca n either ;:Iccept or reject
                a ll o r any of th e reco m me ndations
                of the Rajya Sabha. In both the cases,
                the money bi ll is dee med to have been
                passed by the two Houses.

                4. A financia l bill, not conta in ing sole ly
                the matte rs of Article 11 0, also can be
                introduced onl y in the Lok Sabha a nd
                not in the R.:'1jya Sabha. But, with regard
                to its passage, both the I -louses have
                equa l powers.
                
                5. The final powe r to decide whether a
                pa rticular bill is a Money Bill or not is
                vested in the Speaker of the Lok S<lb ha.
                
                6. The Spea ker of Lok Sabl1<l presides over
                the joi nt sitting of both the Houses.
                
                7. The Lok Sabha with greater number wins
                the battle in a jO in t Sitting excepl when
                the combined stre ngth of the ru ling
                party in both the Houses is less than
                tha t of the opposition pa rties_
                
                8. R ajya Sabha can only discllss the budget
                but C <l nn ot vote on the de mands for
                grants (which is the exclusive privilege
                of the 10k Sabha).

                9. A resolution for the discontinuance of the
                national e merge ncy can n be passed only
                by the lok Sabha a nd not by the Raj ya
                Sabha.
                
                10. The Rajya Sa bha ca n not remove the
                cou nc il of mi n isters by passing a no-
                co nfide nce Ill oti o n. T h is is because
                the Cou ncil of ministers is collectively
                responsible only to th e Lok Sabha .
                But, the R ajya Sabha can discuss and
                crit icise the policies a nd act ivities of the
                gove rn me nt.

        Special Powers of Ra;ya Sabha
            The Rajya Sabha has bee n given fbur exclusive
            or specia l powers that a re not enjoyed by the
            Lok Sabha:

                1. It ca n authorise the Pa rliament to make a
                law 0 11 a subject enumerated in the State
                List (Article 249)-
                
                2. It ca n a uthorise the Pa rl ia ment to crea te
                new All-India Se rvices common to both
                the Ce ntre a nd sta tes ( Article 312).
                
                3. It alone can in itiate a move for the
                re mova l of the Vice-Preside nt. In other
                words, a resolu t ion for the re mova l of
                t he V i ce~ P r es i d e n t ca n be introdu ced
                only in the Rajya Sabha a nd not in th e
                Lok Sa bha (A rti cle 67).

                4. If a procla mat io n is iss ued by the
                President for im posi ng l1<1 tional e me r-
                ge ncy or President's ru le or fin a nciaJ
                emergency at a time when the Lok Sabha
                has been dissolved or the dissolution of
                the Lok Sabha takes place within the
                period allowed fo r its ap proval, the n
                the proclamation can remain effecti ve
                even if it is approved by the Rajya Sabha
                alone (Articles 352, 356 a nd 360).

            An a nalysis of the above points makes it
            clear that the position of the Raj ya Sabha in
            our constitutional system is not as weak as
            that of the House of Lords in the British con-
            stitutional system nor as strong as that of the
            Senate in the American constitutional sys-
            tem . Except in financial matters and control
            over the counci l of ministers, the powers a nd
            status of the Rajya Sabha in a ll other spheres
            arc b roadly equal and coordina te with that of
            the Lok Sabha.

            Even though the Rajya Sabha has been given
            less powers as compared with the Lok Sabha, its
            utility is supported on the following grounds:

                1. It checks hasty, defective, careless and ill-
                considered legislation made by the Lok
                Sabha by making provision of revision
                and thought.
                
                2. It fa cilitates giving represen tation to
                e minent professionals and experts who
                can not fa ce the direct e lection . The
                President nominates 12 such persons to
                the Rajya Sabha.
                
                3. It maintai ns the federal equilibrium
                by protecting the interests of the sL1.tes
                aga inst the undue interference of the
                Centre.

    PARLIAMENTARY PRIVILEGES
        Meaning
            Parliamentary p rivileges are special rights,
            immunities a nd exemptions enjoyed by the
            tWO Houses of Parliament, their committees
            a nd their members. They are necessary in
            order to secure the independe nce and effec-
            tiveness of their actions. Without these privi-
            leges, the Houses can neither mai ntain their
            authority, dignity and honour nor ca n protect
            their members from any obstruction in the dis-
            charge of their pa rliamentary responsibilities.

            The Constitution has also extended the
            parliamenta ry privileges to those persons
            who are entitled to speak and take part in the
            proceedings of a House of Pa rliament or any
            of its committees. These include the attorney
            general of India a nd Union m inisters.
            It must be clarified here that the parliamen-
            tary privileges do not extend to the President
            who is also a n integral part of the Parliament.

        Classification
            Parliamentary privileges ca n be classified
            into two broad categories:
                1. those that are enjoyed by each House of
                Parliam ent coll ectively, and
                2. those that a re enjoyed by the membe rs
                individua lly.

            Collective Privileges The privi leges belong-
            ing to each House of Parliament collectively
            ilrc:
                1. It has the right to pub lish its reports,
                debates and proceedings a nd a lso the
                right to prohibit others fro m publishing
                the sa m e. The 44th Am endment Act of
                1978 resto red the freedo m of the press
                to publish true reports of parliamentary
                proceedi ngs without pri or permission
                of the House. But this is not applicable
                in the case of a secret sitting of the
                House.
                
                2. It can excl ude strangers from its proceed-
                ings and hold secret sittings to discuss
                some importan t matters.
                
                3. It can make rules to regulate its own pro-
                cedure and the conduct of its busi ness
                and to adjud icate upon such matters.
                
                4. It ca n punish members as well as outsid-
                ers for breach of its privileges or its
                con tempt by reprima nd, admonitio n
                or impriso nment (also suspension or
                expulsion, in case of members).
                    - In 1977, the sixth Lok Sabha ex pelled Mrs. Indira
                    Ga ndhi from its membersh ip and sentenced her
                    to ja il for a week for committing a contempt of
                    House while she was Prime Mi nister. But, the sev-
                    enth Lok Sabha rescinded the resolution expelling
                    her by describing it as poli tically motivated. In
                    1990, a former Minister, K.K. Tiwari, was repri-
                    manded by the Rajya Sabha.

                5. It has the right to receive immediate
                information of the arrest, detention,
                conviction, imprisonment and release
                of a member.

                6. It can institute inquiries and order the
                attendance of witnesses and send for
                relevant papers and records.

                7. The courts are prohibited to inquire
                into the proceedings of a House or its
                committees.

                8. No person (either a member or outsider)
                can be arrested, and no legal process
                (civil or criminal) can be served within
                the precincts of the House without the
                permission of the presiding officer.

            Individual Privileges The privileges belong.
            ing to the members individually are:
                1. They cannot be arrested during the ses-
                sion of Parliament and 40 days before
                the beginning and 40 days after the
                end of a session. This privilege is
                available only in civil cases and not in
                criminal cases or preventive detention
                cases.

                2. They have freedom of speech in
                Parliament. No member is liable to any
                proceedings in any court for anything
                said or any vote given by him/her in
                Parliament or its committees. This free-
                dom is subject to the provisions of the
                Constitution and to the rules and stand·
                ing orders regulating the procedure of
                Parliament.
                    - Article 121 of the Constitution says that no discus-
                    sion shall take place in Parliament with respect to
                    the conduct of any judge of the Supreme Court or
                    of a high court in the discharge of his/her duties
                    except upon a motion for presenting an address to
                    the President praying for the removal of the judge.
                    Under Rules 349 to 350 of the Lok Sabha, use of
                    unparliamentary language or unparliamentary
                    conduct of a member is prohibited.
                
                3. They are exempted from jury service.
                They can refuse to give evidence and
                appear as a witness in a case pending in
                a court when Parliament is in session.

        Breach of Privilege and Contempt of the House
            "When any individual or authority dis-
            regards or attacks any of the privileges,
            rights and immunities, either of the
            member individually or of the House
            in its collective capacity, the offence
            is termed as breach of privilege ' and is
            punishable by the House."
                - M.N. Kaul and S.L. Shakdher, Practice and Procedure
                of Parliament, First Edition, p. 157.

            Any act or omission which obstructs a House
            of Parliament, its member or its officer in the
            perfonnance of their functions or which has
            a tendency, directly or indirectly to produce
            results against the dignity, authority and
            honour of the House is treated as a contempt
            of the House.
                - Thomas Erskine May: Parliamentary Practice,
                15th Edition, p. 109.

            Though the two phrases, 'breach of privi-
            lege'. and 'contempt of the Ho.use' are used
            interchangeably, they have different impHca-
            tions. 'Normally, a breach of privilege may
            amount to contempt of the House. Likewise,
            contempt of the House may include a brei ~ h
            of privilege also. Contempt of the House, h ',v-
            ever, has wider implications. There may 1- , a
            contempt of the House without specific' ..,
            committing a breach of privilege (Subhash C. Kashyap: Our Parliament, National Book
                Trust, 1999 Edition, p. 241). S
            lady, 'actions which are not breaches of.J
            specific privilege but are offences againt'~ id.
            dignity and authority of the House amount to
            contempt of the House (Thomas Erskine May: Parliamentary Practice,
16th Edition, p. 43). For example, disobe-
            dience to a legitimate order of the House is
            not a breach of privilege, but can be punished
            as contempt of the House.

        Sources of Privileges
            Originally, the Constitution (Article 105)
            expressedly mentioned two privileges, that
            is, freedom of speech in Parliament and right
            of publication of its proceedings. With regard
            to other privileges, it provided that , they
            were to be the same as those of the British
            House of Commons, its committees and its
            members on the date of its commencement
            (ie, 26 January, 1950), until defined by Par-
            liament. The 44th Amendment Act of 1978
            provided that the other privileges of each
            House of Parliament, its committees and its
            members are to be those which they had on
            the date of its commencement (ie, 20 June,
            1979), until defined by Parliament. This
            means that the position with regard to other
            privileges remains same. In other words, the
            amendment has made only verbal changes
            by dropping a direct reference to the British
            House of Commons, without making any
            change in the implication of the provision.
                - The then law minister gave the following reason
                for dropping reference to the British House of
                Commons; ~That the original provision-there
                was no escape from it-had referred to the British
                House of Commons. Now a proud country like In-
                dia would like to avoid making any reference to
                a foreign institution in its own solemn constitu-
                tional document. Therefore, this verbal change is
                being introduced so that there may not be any ref-
                erence to a foreign institution.~

            It should be noted here that the Parlia-
            ment, till now, has not made any special law
            to exhaustively codify all the privileges. They
            are based on five sources, namely,
                1. Constitutional provisions,
                2. Various laws made by Parliament,
                3. Rules of both the Houses,
                4. Parliamentary conventions, and
                5. Judicial interpretations.

    SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT
        The doctrine of 'sovereignty of Parliament'
        is associated with the British Parliament.
        Sovereignty means the supreme power
        within the State. That supreme power in
        Great Britain lies with the Parliament. There
        are no 'legal' restrictions on its authority
        and juris~iction.

        Therefore, the sovereignty of Parliament
        (parliamentary supremacy) is a cardinal
        feature of the British constitutional system.
        According to AV Dicey, the British jurist, this
        principle has three · implications ( A.V. Dicey; Introduction to the Study of the Law of the
Constitution, Macmillan, 1965 Edition, pp. 39-40.):
            1. The Parliament can make, amend, sub-
            stitute or repeal any law. De Lolme,
            a British political analyst, said, :The
            British Parliament can do every thing
            except make a woman a man and a man
            a woman'.
            2. The Parliament can make constitutional
            laws by the same procedure as ordinary
            laws. In other words, there is no legal
            distinction between the constituent
            authority and the legislative authority
            of the British Parliament.
            3. The Parliamentary laws cannot be
            declared invalid by the Judiciary as being
            unconstitutiona1. In other words, there is
            no system of judicial review in Britain.

        The Indian Parliament, on the other hand,
        cannot be regarded as a sovereign body in
        the similar sense as there are 'legal' restric-
        tions on its authority and jurisdiction. The
        factors that limi. t the sovereignty of Indian
        Parliament are:

        1. Written Nature of the Constitution
            The Constitution is the fundamental law of the
            land in our country. It has defined the author-
            ity and jurisdiction of all the three organs
            of the Union government and the nature of
            interrelationship between them. Hence, the
            Parliament has to operate within the limits
            prescribed by the Constitution. There is also
            a legal distinction between the legislative
            authority and the constituent authority of the
            Parliament. Moreover, to effect certain amend-
            ments to the Constitution, the ratification of
            half of the states is also required. In Britain,
            on the other hand, the Constitution is neither
            written nor there is anything like a fundamen-
            tal law of the land.

        2. Federal System of Government
            India has a federal system of government with
            a constitutional division of powers between
            the Union and the states. Both have to operate
            within the spheres allotted to them. Hence,
            the law-making authority of the Parliament
            gets confined to the subjects enumerated in
            the Union List and Concu rrent List and does
            not extend to the subjects enumerated in the
            State List (except in five abnormal circum-
            sta nces and that too for a short period). Brit-
            ain, on the other hand, has a unitary system
            of government and hence, all the powers are
            vested in the Centre.

        3. System of Judicial Review
            The adoption of an independent ,Judiciary
            with the power of judicial review also restricts
            the supremacy of our Parliament. Both the
            Supreme Court and high courts can declare
            the laws enacted by the Parliament as void
            and ultra vires (unconstitutional), if they con-
            travene any provision of the Constitution. On
            the other hand, there is no system of judicial
            review in Britain. The British Courts have
            to apply the Parliamentary laws to specific
            cases, without examining their constitutional-
            ity, legality or reasonableness.

        4. Fundamental Rights
            The authority of the Parliament is a lso
            restricted by the incorporation of a code of
            justiciable fundamental rights under Part III
            of the Constitution. Article 13 prohibits the
            State from making a law that either takes
            away tOtally or abrogates in part a fundamen-
            tal right. Hence, a Parliamentary law that
            contravenes the fundamental rights shall be
            void. In Britain, on the other hand, there is
            110 codification of justiciable fundamental
            rights in the Constitution. The British Par-
            liament has also not made any law that lays
            down the fundamental rights of the citizens.
            However, it does not mean that the British
            cit izens do not have rights. Though there is
            no charter guaranteeing rights, there is maxi-
            mum liberty in Britain due to the existence
            of the Rule of Law.

        Therefore, even though the nomenclature
        and orga nisationa l pattern of our Parliament
        is similar to that of the British Parliam ent,
        there is a substantial difference between the
        two. The Indian Parliament is not a sovereign
        body in the sense in which the British Parlia-
        ment is a sovereign body. Unlike the British
        Parliament, the authority and jurisdiction of
        the Indian Parliament are defined, limited
        and restrained.

        In this regard, the Ind.ian Parliament is
        similar to the American Legislature (known
        as Congress). In USA also, the sovereignty of
        Congress is legally restricted by the written
        character of the Const itution, the federal
        system of government, the system of judicial
        review and the Bill of Rights.

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 23.5 Allocation of Seats in Parliament for States and Union Territories and seats reserved for SCs
and STs in the Lok Sabha
S.No. States/UTs No. of Seats In No. of Seats to Reserved for the Reserved fot the
RaJya Sabha lok Sabha Scheduled Castes Scheduled Tribes
I. States
1. Andhra Pradesh 11 25 4 1
2. Arunachal Pradesh 2
3. Assam 7 l' 1 2
4. Bihar 16 40 6
5. Chhattlsgarh 5 11 4
S No States/UTs No. of Seats in No of Seats In Reserved for the Reserved for the
RajYa Sabha Lok Sabha Scheduled Castes Scheduled Trtbes
i 6. 2
r 7 . ..
Goa
tC url'J
11
26 2 4
........-~ n,.
GU~;at : :
8.
Haryana 5 10 2
------ ------_ ..
9.
Himachal Pradesh 3
4
10.
6
Jharkhand _~.~_~~_=~;.-_
14
5
, ,
~
-
--------_ ..
11. Karnataka 12
28
5
2
12. Kerala 9
20
2
" ."' ... 2
13. Madhya P r ad~sh
11
29
4
6
14. Maharashtra . 19
_:aw ... :n
15. Manipu !!. ' _____ ~
48
5
4
2
16. Meghalaya
2
2
~ •
•
17. Mizor "a "m ::.. ___ ~_& _~
18. Nagaland
-
10
7
-----,.-.
10
3
Sikkim
" .. • liE"'" , ~ , N
Tamil Nadu 18
•
39
7
7
, ......
17
3
2
2
3
5
---
'---~-~~
31
27. Uttar Pradesh 80 17
r.;: 28 :;: .
_ _ _ w ;:,;; es :: 1 C; 8 ;: e;:. '9 " a :c '
_ _ _____
__ ...:: 11. Union Territories
- .:.:; 1 ~ ___ . ,.~.=o _;. 42 ;;.._~" _~
2
_ __ ....; 1 ~ 0 ~ _____ ._
1. Andaman and Nicobar
Islands
C " -"="
2.
Ch; ,
dI9";":== -;
3. Dadra and Nagar Haveli 2
and Daman and Diu
~-----
4. Oelhi (The National 3 7
Capital Territory of
D~I ~I)
5. Lakshadweep
6.
Pud ~her'Y _
7. Jammu and Kashmir 4 5
-
t .
"
= .. . 0
, _ ... 21G&UL" ""A' -=-----_
8 Ladakh
III. Nominated members 12
Total 245
l--___ ~~ __ ~~~~_~:=.-
_ _ _ .: 5 ~ 4 '" 3 ~
_ __ > • 84 47
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 23.6 Durations of the Lok Sabha (from First Lok Sabha to Present l ok Sabha)
Lok Sabha Duration Remarks
First
Second
Third
Founh
Fifth
Sixth
Seventh
Eighth
Ninth
Tenth
Eleventh
Twelfth
1952-1957
1957-1962
1962-1967
1967- 1970
1971-1977
1977-1979
1980-1984
1985-1989
1989-1991
1991-1996
1996-1997
1998-1999
Thineenth
1999-2004
Founeenth 2004-2009
Fifteenth 2009-20 14
Sixteenth 2014-20 19
Dissolved 38 days before expiry of its term.
Dissolved 40 days before expiry of its term.
Dissolved 44 days before expiry of its term.
Dissolved one year and 79 days before expiry of its term.
Term of the Lok Sabha was extended two times by one year at a time. Howeve'
.
the House was dissolved after having been in existence for a period of five
years, 1 0 months and six days.
Dissolved after having been in existence for a period of two years, four months
and 28 days.
Dissolved 20 days before expiry of its term.
Dissolved 48 days before expiry of its term.
Oissolved after having been in existence for a period of one year, two momhs
and 25 days.
Dissolved after having been in existence for a period of one year, six months and
13 days.
Dissolved after having been In existence for a period of one year, one month and
four days.
Dissolved 253 days before expiry of its term.
Seventeenth 2019-Continulng
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 23.7 Speakers of the Lok Sabha (from First Lok Sabha to Present Lok Sabha)
Lok Sabha Name Tenure (Remarks)
First 1. Ganesh Vasudev Mavalanker 1952 to 1956 (Died)
2. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar 1956 to 1957
Second Ananthasayanam Ayyangar 1957 to 1962
Third Hukum Singh 1962 to 1967
Fourth 1. Neelam Sanjiva Reddy 1967 to 1969 (Resigned)
2. Gurdial Singh DhHlan 1969 to 197 1
Fifth 1. Gurdial Singh OhlUan 1971 to 1975 (Resigned)
2. Bali Ram Bhagat 1976 to 1977
Lok Sabha Name Tenure (Remarks) .
Sixth 1. Neelam Sanjiva Reddy 1977 to 1977 (Resigned)
2. K.S. Hegde 1977 to 1980
Seventh Salram Jakhar 1980 101985
I Eighth Salram Jakhar 1985 to 1989
Ninth Rabi Ray 1989 to 1991
Tenth Shlvraj PaUl 1991 to 1996
Eleventh P .A. Sangma 1996 to 1998
I Twelfth G.M.C. Balayogi 1998 to 1999
Thirteenth 1. G.M.C. 8alayogl 1999 to 2002 (Died)
2. Manohar Joshi 2002 to 2004
Fourteenth Somnath Chatterjee 2004 to 2009
[ Fifteenth Ms. Melra Kumar 2009 - 2014
Sixteenth Ms. 5umitra Mahajan 2014 - 2019
Seventeenth Om Bida 2019 - till date
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------- Table start -------------------------------------------------
Table 23.8 Articles Related to Parliament at a Glance
Article No Subject Matter
General
79. Constitution of Parliament
80. Composition of the Council of States
l 81. Composition of the House of the People
82. Readjustment after each census
83. Duration of Houses of Parliament
84. Qualification for membership of Parliament
85. Sessions of Parliament, prorogation and dissolution
86. Right of President to address and send messages to Houses
L 87. Special address by the President
88. Rights of Ministers and Attorney-General as respects Houses
Officers of Parliament
89.
The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Council of States
90. Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the office of Deputy Chairma ~ n _
Article No Subject Matter
9 1. 92. 93. 94. 95. 96. 97, Power of the Deputy Chairman or other person to perform the duties of the office of, or to act as,
Chairman
The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman not to preside while a resolution for his/her removal from office
is under consideration
The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of the People
Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of Speaker and Deputy Speaker
Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the duties of the office of, or to act as,
Speaker
The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolution for his/her removal from office Is
under consideration
Salaries and allowances of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker
98. Secretariat of Parliament
Conduct of Business
99. 100. Oath or affirmation by members
Voting in Houses, power of Houses to act notwithstanding vacancies and quorum
Disqualifications of Members
101. Vacation of seats
102. Disqualifications for membership
103. 104. 105. 106. Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members
Penalty for sitting and voUng before making oath or affirmation under Article gg or when not qualified
or when disqualified
Powers, Privileges and Immunities of Parliament and its Members
Powers, privileges, etc., of the Houses of Parliament and of the members and committees thereof
Salaries and allowances of members
107. 108. 109. 11 0. Leglslattve Procedure
Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills
Joint sitting of both Houses In certain cases
Special procedure in respect of Money Bills
Definition of "Money B ills~
111 . Assent to Bills
Procedures In Financial Matters
112. Annual financial statement
113. Procedure in Parliament with respect to estimates
rticle No Subject Matter
114. Appropriation Bills
11 S. Supplementary, additional or excess grants
116. Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional grants
117. Special provlstons as to financial Bills
Procedure Gener.lly
I .
118. Rules of procedure
119. 120. 121 . 122. 123. Regulation by law of procedure In Parliament In relation to financial business
language to be used in Parliament
Restriction on discussion In Parliament
Courts not to Inquire IMo proceedings of Parliament
legislative Power. of the President
Power of President to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Parliament
------------------------------------------------- Table end -------------------------------------------------





























































































































































































































































CHAPTER 14: Federal System

Political scientists have classified governments into unitary and federal on
the basis of the nature of relations
between the national government and the regiona l governments. By definition, a unitary
government is one in which an the powers
are vested in the national government and the
regional governments, if at al1 exist, derive
their authority from the national government. A federal government, on the other
hand, is one in which powers are divided
between the national government and the regional governments by the Constitution itself
and both operate in their respective jurisdictions independently. Britain, France, Japan,
China, Italy, Norway, Sweden and so on have
a unitary mode l of government while th e
US, Switzerland, Australia, Canada, Russia,
Brazil, Argentina and so on have a federal
J1?odel of government, In a federal model, the

national government is known as the Federal
government or the Central government or the
Union government and the regional govern·
ment is known as the state government or the
provincial government.
The specific featu'res of the federal an d
unitary governments are mentioned in a
comparative manner in Table 14.1.
The term 'federation' is drived from ' a
Latin word foedu s which means 'treaty' or
'agreement'. Thus, a federation is a new state
(political system) which is formed through a
treaty or an agreement between the various
units. The units of a federation are known
by various names like states (as in US) or
cantons (as in Switzerland) or provinces (as
in Canada) or republics (as in Russia).
A federation can be formed in two ways,
that is, by way of integration or by way of
disintegration. In the first case, a number of

Table 14.1 Comparing Features of Federal and Unitary Governments
Federal Government

UnItary Governm ent

1. Dual Government (that is, national government
and reglon~1 government)

1. Single government, that Is. the national government which
may create regional governments

[ 2. Wrinen Constitution

2. Constitution ~ay be ~ritten (F;anCe) o.!: unwri~en (Britain) . J

3. Division of powers between the national and
regional government

3. No division of powers. All powers are vested in the national
government

[ 4. Sup<em,cy ofth.

constit~u~~

5. Rigid Constitution

4. Constitution may be supreme (Japan) or may not be
supreme (Britain)

16. I~dependent Judicl~ry

S. Constitution may be rigid (France) or flexible (Britain)

. 7"- ~icameral I:~i ~e

7. Legislature may be bicameral (Britain) or unicameral (China)

6. l udlclary

~ay be_ lndepende~t or may .not ~e Ind~pendent~ 1

138 ,~ Indian Polity
militarily weak or econom ica lly backward
states (indepen dent) come together to form
a big and a strong u n ion, as for exam pl e,
the US. In the seco nd casc, a big unitary
state is co nverted into a federation by granting autonom y to the provinces to promote
regional interest (fo r example, Ca nada). The
US is the first and t he old est federatio n in
the world. It was formed in 1787 following the
America n Revolution (1775-83). It compri ses
50 states (orig in ally 13 states) a nd is taken as
the mod e l of fede ratio n . The Ca na dian Federatio n , comprising 10 prov in ces (orig in a ll y 4
provinces) is a lso qu ite old-formed in 1867.
The Co n st itution of In dia provides fo r a
federal syste m of govern ment in the country. T he framers adopted the federa l system
due to two main reasons-the large size of
the country and its soc io-cu ltura l diversity.
They realised th a t the federa l system not
only ensures the efficient governa nce of the
cou n try but al so reconc il es nat ional unity
with reg ional autonomy. .
However, the term 'federation' has no
where been used in the Co nstitution. In stead ,
Artic le 1 of the Co nst itution describes India
asCi 'Unio n of States'. Accordin g to Dr. B.R.
Ambedkar, t he phrase 'U ni o n of States' has
bee n preferred to 'Fede ra ti on of Sta tes' to
indicate two th in gs: (i) t he Indian fede rat ion
is not the result of a n agree ment a mong the
states like the American federation ; and (ii)
the states have no r ight to secede from the
federation . The federa tion is a un ion beca use
it is ind estruct ib le.T he Indian fed e ral system is based on the
'Ca nadian model' and not o n t he 'A meri can
model'. The 'Canadian mode l' differs fundamenta ll y from the 'American model ' in so
fa r as it estab lishes a very strong centre. The
Ind ian federation resembl es the Ca ndi an
federation (i) in its formation ( i.e. , by way of
di sintegration); (ii) in its p refere n ce to the
term 'Union' (t he Canadhl11 federation is a lso
called a 'Union'); and (iii) in its central is in g
tende ncy (i.e. , vesting more powe rs in the
ce ntre vis-a-v is the states).
lCOIISfitll cnt Assembly Debatcs, Volume VII , p. 43.

FEDERAL FEATURES OF
THE CONSTITUTION
The federal features of the Constitution of
India are expla ined below:

II IDual Polity
T he Co nstitution es tabli shes a dual polity
co ns isti ng of the Union at the Centre a nd the
states at the pe riph e ry. Eac h is e ndowed wit h
sovereign powers to be exerc ised in the fie ld
ass igned to thcm respect ivel y by the Co nstit utio n . The Uni on govern ment deals with
matters of nat ional importan ce like defence,
fore ign affa irs, curren cy, communication and
so on. The state governments, on the othe r
hand , look afte r matters of regional and local
im portance l ike publi c order, agricul ture,
hea lth, loca l government and so on.

!I IWritten Constitution
T he Co nst itution is not only a writte n docu ment but a lso t h e le ngthiest Constitution
of the world. Origina ll y, it co ntained a Preamb le, 395 Arti c les (d ivided in to 22 Parts)
an d 8 Sc hed ul es. 2 At present, it c onsists
of a Preamble, about 470 Art ic les (di vid ed
in to 25 Parts) a nd ]2 Sc hed ules. 3 It specifi es t he structure, organisat io n , powers and
funct ions of both the Ce nt ra l a nd state gove rnm e nts and prescribes the limits wit hi n
which th ey must operate. Thus, it avo id s
the mi sunde rstandings and disagree ments
between th e two.

II IDivision of Powers
The Co nst itution d ivided the powers between
the Cent re and the states in terms of the
Union List, Statc Li st and Concurrent List in
1'he American Constitution originally co nsisted
of 7 Articles on ly, thc Australian 128 and the
Canadia n 147.
l-rhc various amendmcnts ca rried o ut since 1951
hiwe deleted about 20 Articles a n d one Part (Vl!)
and added abollt 95 Articles, four Parts (IVA, IXA,
IXB a nd Xl VA) and four Schcdules (9,10, II and 12).

Federal System

the Seventh Schedule. The Union List consists
of 98 subjects (originally 97), the State List
59 subjects (origin"ally 66) and the Concurrent List 52 subjects (originally 47). Both the
Centre and the states can make laws on the
subjects of the concurrent Jist, but in case of a
conflict, the Central law prevails. The residuary subjects (ie, which are not mentioned in
any of the three lists) are given to the Centre.

II ISupremacy of the Constitution
The Constitution is the supreme (or the highest) law ofthe land . .The laws enacted by the
Centre and the states must conform to its
provisions. Otherwise, they can be declared
invalid by the Supreme Court or the high
courts through their power of judicial review.
Thus, the organs of the government (legislative, executive and judicial) at both the
levels must operate within the jurisdiction
prescribed by the Constitution.

El lRigid Constitution
The division of powers established by the
Constitution as well as the supremacy of
the Constitution can be maintained only if
. the method of its amendment is rigid.
Hence, the Constitution is rigi4 to the extent
that those provisions which are concerned
with the federal structure (Le., Centre-state
relations and judicial organisation) can be
amended only by the jOint action of the
Central and state governments. Such provisions require for their amendment a special
majori ty 4 of the Parliament and also an
approv~l of half of the state legislatures.

rl l independ~nt Judiciary
The Constitution establishes an independent
judiciary ~ea·ded by the Supreme Court for
two purposes: one, to protect the supremacy
of the Constitution by exercising the power of
judicial review; and two, to settle the disputes
4A majority of two-thirds of the members of each

House present and 'voting and a majority of the
total membership of each House.

~ 139

between the Centre and the states or between
the states. The Constitution contains various
measures like security of tenure" to judges,
fixed service conditions and so on to make
the judiciary independent of the government.

II IBi~ameralism
The Constitution provides for a bicameral
legislature consisting of an Upper House
(Rajya Sabha) and a Lower House (Lok
Sabha).·The Rajya Sabha represents the states
of Indian Federation, while the Lok Sabha
represents the people of India as a whole.
The Rajya Sabha (even though a less powerful chamber) is required to maintain the federal equilibrium by protecting the interests
of the states against the undue interference
of the Centre.

UNITARY FEATURES OF
THE CONSTITUTION
Besides the above federal features, the Indian
Constitution also possesses the following unitary or non-federal features:

IIIStrong Centre
The division of powers is in favour of the Centre and highly inequitable from the federal
angle. Firstly, the- Union List contains more
subjects than the State List. Secondly, the
more important subjects have been included
in the Union List. Thirdly, the Centre has
overriding auth.o rity over the Concurrent List.
Finally, the residuary powers have also been
lef:t with the Centre, while in the US, they are
vested in the states. Thus, the Constitution has
made the Centre very strong.

ti lStates Not Indestructible
Unlike in other federations, the states in India
have no right to territorial integrity. The
Parliament can by unilateral action change
the area, boundaries or name of any state.
Moreover, it requires only a simple majority and not a special majority. Hence, the

140

,(:I Indian Polity

Ind ia n Federatio n is "a n ind estructible Unio n
of destructi bl e states~. The America n Fede ratio n , on the other hand , is descr ibed as ~an
indest ructib le Unio n of indestructibl e sta tes".

II ISingle Constitution

beco mes all powerfu l an d the states go in to
the tota l co n trol ofthe Centre. It co n verts the
federa l structu re in to a unitary on e with out a
for mal amend me nt of the Co nsti tut io n. Th is
k ind of tra n sformation is not fo und in any
oth er federa ti on.

Us uall y, in a fe deration , the states have the
right to fra me their own Con stitut io n separate from that of the Centre. In Ind ia, o n the
co n tra ry, no such power is give n to th e states.
The Con stitutio n of Indi a embodi es not onl y
the Co nst itutio n of th e Ce ntre but also those
of th e states. Both the Ccntre and the states
must ope rate within th is single- fra me. The
o nl y exce ptio n in th is rega rd was the case of
erstwh ile Ja mm u and Kash mir which had its
.
.
5
own (state) Const itut IO n.

El lSingle Citizenship

D IFlexibility ofthe Constitution

11 1Integrated Judiciary

The process of constitutiona l a mendment is
less rigid tha n what is found in other federations. The bulk of the Co nstitutio n ca n be
amended by the un ilatera l action of the Parli ame n t, eithe r by sim pl e majo rity or by special
major ity. Furth er, the power to initiate a n
a me ndm ent to the Co nstitutio n li es on ly with
the Ce n tre. In US, the states ca n also p ropose
.::In ame ndm en t to th e Co nst itut io n.

In spite of a dua l polity, the Constitution of
In dja, like that of Ca nada, adopted the syste m
of sin gle citi zenship. There is o n ly Indian Citize nsh ip and no separate state citizensh ip. All
citize ns irrespective of the sta te in whi ch they
are born or reside enjoy th e sam e rig hts all
over the cou ntry. The other federal sta tes like
US and Australia have dual citizenshi p, that is,
national citizensh ip as well as sta te citi'l..en ship.

The Ind ian Constitution has established an
in tegrated j udic ial system with the Su pre me
Co ur t at the top a nd the state h igh courts
below it. Thi s single system of co urts en forces
both the Ce ntral laws as well as th e state laws.
In US, on the other han d, there is a double
system of co u rts whereby the fede ral laws are
en forced by the fe dera l j udiciary an d the state '
laws by the state jud icia ry.

II INo Equality of State Representation g IAll-India Services
The sta tes are given represe ntation in the Rajya
Sabha on the basis of populati on. Hence, the
membership vari es fro m I to 31. In US, 011 the
other ha nel, the princi ple of equa lity of re presentHtion of states in th e Upper '-louse is fu ll y
recogn ised. TllUS, the Amer ican Se nate has
]00 membcrs, two from each state. This p rinciple is regarded as a safeguard for small er states.

El lEmergency Provisions
The Co n st itutio n stipu la tes three typ es of
emerge ncies-natio nal, state a nd financ ial.
Du ring an emerge ncy, the Central governm ent
~iI1 2OJ9, the erstwhile state of Jammu a nd K.:1sh mi.f

enjoyed a special St.'ltuS by virtue of Article 370 of
the Constitution of India .

In US, the Federal govern men t and the state
governm ents have th eir se parate pu bli c services. In Indi a a lso, th e Centre a nd th e stHtes
have their separate public services. But, in
addi tio n , th ere a re all- India se rvices (lAS,
IPS, a nd IFoS) wh ich are co mm on to both the
Cen tre and the sta tes. The members of these
services are rec rui ted a nd train ed by the Cen tre wh ich also possess ultima te co ntrol ove r
them. Thus, these services violate the principle
of federa li sm unde r the Co n stitution .

IIiI l lntegrated Audit Machinety
The Comptrolle r and Aud itor-General of Ind ia
aud its the acco u nts of not o nl y th e Ce n tra l
gove rnm en t but also those o f the sta tes. But,

,

Federal System

his/her appointment and removal is done
by the President without consulting the
states. Hence, this office restricts the financial autonomy of the states. The American
Comptroller-General, on the contrary, has no
role with respect to the accounts of the states.

DB Parliament's Authority Over State
List

Even in the limited sphere of authority allotted to them, the states do not have exclusive
control. The Parliament is empowered to
legislate on any subject of the State List if the
Rajya Sabha passes a resolution to that effect
in the national interest. This means that the
legislative competence of the Parliament can
be extended without amending the Constitution. Notably, this can be done when there is
no emergency of any kind.

IfI I Appointment of Governor
The governor, who is the head of the state, is
appointed by the President. He/she holds office
during the pleasure of the President. He/she also
acts as an agent of the Centre. Through him/
her, the Centre exercises control over the states.
The American Constitution, on the contrary,
provided for an elected head in the states. In
this respect, India adopted the Canadian system.

ID l lntegrated Election Machinery
The Election Commission conducts elections
not only to the Central legislature but also to
the state,legisl atur~s. But, this body is constituted by the President and the states have no
say in this matter. The position is same with
regard to the removal of its members as well.
On the other hand, US has separate machineries for the conduct of elections at the federal
and state levels.

IDI I Veto Over State Bills
The governor is empowered to reserve certain
types of bills passed by the state legislature
for the consideration of the President. The
President can withhold his assent to such bills

tJ, 141

not only in the first instance but also in the
second instance. Thus, the President enjoys
absolute veto (and not suspensive veto) over
state bills. But in US and Australia, the states
are autonomous within their fields and there
is no provision for any such reservation.

CRITICAL EVALUATION OF
THE FEDERAL SYSTEM
From the above, it is clear that the Consti,tution of India has deviated from the traditional
federal systems like US, Switzerland and
Australia and incorporated a large number
of unitary or non-federal features, tilting the
balance of power in favour of the Centre. This
has prompted the Constitutional experts to
challenge the federal character of the Indian
Constitution. Thus, KG Wheare described the
Constitution of India as "quasi-federal". He
remarked that "Indian Union is a unitary
state with subsidiary federal features rather
than a federal state with subsidiary unitary
features.,,6
According to K Santhanam, the two factors
have been responsible for increasing the unitary bias (tendency of centralisation) of the
Constitution. These are: (i) the dominance
of the Centre in the financial sphere and the
dependence of the states upon the Central
grants; and (ii) the emergence of a powerful erstwhile planning commission which
controlled the developmental process in the
states6a • He observed: ~India has practically
functioned as a unitary state though the
Union and the states have tried to function
formany and legally as a federation.'"
However, there are other political scientists
who do not agree with the above descriptions.
Thus, Paul Appleby8 characterises the Indian
6K.C, Wheare: Federal Government, 1951, p. 28.
Sa ln 2615, the Planning Commission was replaced
by a new body called the NITI Aayog (National
Institution for Transforming India).
7 K. Santhanam; Union-State Relations in India, 1960,
pp.50-70.
8 Pau l Appleby: Public Administration in India, 1953,
p.51.

142

P

Indian Polity

system as ~ex tre m e l y fede ra l". Mo rris J on es9
termed it as a "bargain in g federa lism ". Ivor
J ennings lO has desc ribed it as a "federat ion
wit h a stro ng ce n t ra li si ng te nd e n cy". He
o bse rved tha t Uth e Indi a n Co n st itutio n is
ma inl y fede ra l with uniqu e safegua rds for
enforcing natio na l un ity an d growth ". Alexan drowicz lJ stated tha t "In dia is a case sui
generis (i.e., u n iqu e in ch aracter). Granv ill e
Austin 12 ca ll ed the Indi a n fede ra lis m as a
"coope ra ti ve fede ra li sm". He said tha t t hough
the Co nstitu tio n of India has c reated a stron g
Cen tra l governm e nt, it has not made the sta te
gove rnm en ts weak a nd has not reduced th e m
to the leve l of administrative age ncies fo r t he
execution of policies of the Ce ntra l gove rn me nt. He desc ribed the Indi a n fe de rati on
as "a n ew kind of fede ra ti o n to meet India 's
peculiar needs".
On t he nat ure of the Ind ia n Consti tu tio n , Dr. B.R. Ambedka r made the foll owi ng
o bse rva tion in t he Con st it uent Asse mbl y:
"The Con st it uti o n is a Federa l Con stitution
in as mu ch as it esta blishes a dua l polity. The
Uni on is not a league of states, united in a
loose relationsh ip, nor a re the states the agencies of the Uni on, derivi ng powers from it.
Bo th the Un ion a nd the states are crea ted by
th e Constitu tion , both de ri ve the ir respecti ve
authori ty from the Con stituti on.,,13 He furth e r
obse rved: "Yet the Co nsti t utio n avo ids t he
tight mould of federalis m and cou ld be both
unitary as we ll as fede ra l accordi ng to the
require me nts of tim e a nd circu msta nces".14
Whil e repl y in g to the c riti c ism of overce ntrali sat ion in the Con st ituti on , he stated:
"A serious com plai nt is made o n the gro und
that the re is too much ce ntra lisation a nd t he
9Mo rris Jones: Tile GOlICnlmellt and Politics ill India,

1960,p. 14.
IOlvo r Jenn ings: Some Characteristics of tilt: Indian

Constitu. tion, 1953, p. I.
AIexandrowicz: Constitu tional Development i 1l
India, 1957, pp. 157-70.
I2Cra nvil.le
Austin: Tile Indiall COllstItutiollCornersfOne of a Nation , Oxford, 1966, pp. 186-88.
I)COll stihlem Assembly Debates, Vol. VIII , p. 33 .
14 / bid, Vol. VII , p p . 33-34.
11 C.H .

states have bee n reduced to muni c ipa l ities. It
is clea r that th is view is not on ly a n exaggeratio n but is a lso fou nded on a m isundersta nding of what exactly the Co nstitution contri ves
to do. As to the relation s be twee n the Ce n tre
a nd the states, it is necessary to bea r in min d
the funda me nta l princi ple on whic h it rests.
The basic prin ci ple of fe de ra li sm is tha t the
legislative and executive authority is pa rtitioned between the Ce nt re a nd the states
not by a ny law to be mad e by th e Ce ntre but
by th e Constit ution itsel f, Thi s is wha t the
Co nstitutio n does. T he states a re in n o way
dependent upon the Centre fo r t he ir legislative or execut ive a uthority. The states a nd
the Centre are co-equa l in thi s matter. It is
di ffic ul t to see how such a Co nstitu tion ca n
be call ed ce nt ra li sm . It is, th erefore, wron g
to say that th e sta tes have been placed under
the Centre. T he Cent re cannot by its own will
a lter th e boundary of thi s pa rtit ion. Nor can
t he j udic ia ry".1 5
In th e Bo mmai case l 6 ( 1994), the Supre me
Court la id down tha t th e Const itution is federal an d characterised federa li sm as its 'basic
featu re'. It observed: "The fact that under the
schem e of ou r Co nstitu tio n, greater power
is co n fe r red upon the Ce ntre l.Iis-a-l.Iis th e
states does not mean that th e states a re mere
a ppendages of the Centre. Th e states have an
inde pendent co nst it utional existe nce. They
a re not sate ll ites or age nts of th e Ce ntre.
Wi thi n the sphere a llotted to them , the states
a re sup re me. T he fact tha t du ring e merge ncy
a nd in certa in other eventualities their powers
a re overridden or in vaded by the Ce ntre is not
destructive of the esse ntia l federa l feat ure of
the Co nsti tution. T hey are exceptions a nd the
exceptions a re not a rul e. Let it be sa id that the
fede ralism in the Indian Constit ution is not a
matter of administrat ive con veni e nce, but one
of prin ci ple- the outcome of our own process
a nd a recogn iti on of the grou nd realities".
ISDr. B. R. Ambedkar's speech in the Constituent
Asse mbly on 25. 11 .1949 reproduced in TIle
ConstItutioll lIml tile Constituent Assembly; Lok
Sabha Secre ta ria t, 1990, p. 176.
16S.R. Bomma; \' 5. Un ion of India ( 1994).

Federal System

In fact, th e federalism in India represents
a co mpromi se between the following two
conflicting considerations 1':
( i) norm al division of powers under which
states enjoy autonomy within their own
spheresj anq
(ii) need for national integrity and a strong
Union government under exceptional
circumstances.
The following trends in th e working of
India n political system reflects its federal
spirit: (i) Thrritorial disputes between states, for
exa mple, between Maharashtra and Kamataka
over Belgaumj (ti) Disputes between states over
I'Subash C. Kashyap: Our Parliament, National Book
Trust, 1999 Edition , p. 40.

~ 143

sharing of river water, for example, between
Karnataka and Thmil Nadu over Cauvery waterj
(iii) The emergence of regional parties and
their coming to power in states like Andhra
Pradesh, Thmil Nadu, etc.j (iv) The creation of
new states to fulfil the regional asp irations, for
exa mple, Miwram or Jharkhand or Thlanganaj
(v) Demand of the states for more financial
grants from the Centre to meet their developmental n eeds; (vi) Assertion of autonomy by
the states and their resistance to the interferen ce from the Ce ntrej (vii) Supreme Court's
imposition of several proccdurallimitations on
the use of. Article 356 (President's Rule in the
States) by the Centre! 8
18S. R Bomlnai vs. Union of In dia ( 1994).

CHAPJiER

15

T

he Constituti on of Indi a, being federa l
in structu re, di vides a ll powers (legislative, executive and fina nc ial) between
the Ce ntre and the sta tes. However, there is no
divis ion of judi cia 1 power as the Const itutio n
has esta bli shed an integrated judicia l system
to e n fo rce both the Centra l laws as we ll as
state la ws.
Though th e Ce n tre and th e sta tes are
su preme in the ir respective fields, th e maximum ha rm ony and coo rdin ation between
the m is esse nti a l for the effecti ve o peration
of the federal system. Hence, the Co nstituti o n
co ntain s elaborate provisions to regu late the
var ious dimension s of the relations between
the Ce ntre and the sta tes.
The Cen tre-state re lat io ns ca n be studied
under three hea ds:
• Leg isl ative relatio ns.
• Admin istrati ve re lat ions.
• Finan c ia l relation s.

t LEGISLATIVE RELATIONS
Articles 245 to 255 in Pa rt Xl of th e Constitution dea l with the legi slative relations between
the Cen tre a nd th e states. Besides these, there
are so me other articles dea ling with the same
subject.
Like any other Federal Co nstitution, th e
India n Co nsti tution also di vides the legislat ive
powers betwee n the Centre and the states with
respect to both the territory and the subjects of
legislatio n. Further, the Constitution provides
for the parl iamentary legislat ion in the state
field under five extraordina ry situations as well

Centre-State
Relations

as the centre's control over state leg islation in
certain cases. Thus, there a re four aspects in
the Centre-states legislative relations, viz.,
• Thrritoria l exte n t of Central a nd state
legisla ti on ;
• Distribu tion of legisla tive subj ects;
• Parliamentary leg islation in the sta te
field; a nd
• Cen tre's control over state leg islation.

II Territorial Extent of Central
and State Legislation
T he Co nstitution defines the territorial limits
of the legislat ive powers vested in the Centre
and the states in the fo ll owi ng way:
(i) The Parliam en t ca n make laws for th e
who le or a ny part of th e te rrito ry of
Lnd ia. T he territory of Indi a includes
the states, the uni on territories, and any
other area for th e time being incl uded
in the te rritory o f Ind ia.
(ij) A state leg islature can make laws for
th e whole or a ny part of the state. The
laws made by a state legis la ture a re not
appli ca ble ou tside the state, except when
th e re is a su ffi cient nexus betwee n the
state and the object.
(iii) T he Pa rliam e nt a lo ne ca n make 'ex traterritorial legislatio n '. T hu s, the laws of
the Pa rli a men t are a lso a ppli ca ble to
th e Indian citize ns and the ir property
in an y part of the world.
Howeve r, the Con st it ution places certain
restri ction s on th e plenary territoria l jurisdi ction of th e Parlia ment. In other words, the

Centre-State Relations

laws of Pa rliame nt are not a pplica ble in the
follow ing areas:
(i) Th e Presid ent ca n m ake regula ti o ns
for the peace, progre ss and good governm ent of the Union Th rritor i es of
th e Anda man and Nicob ar Island s,
Laksh adwee p, Dadra and Nagar Haveli
and Da man and Diu and Ladak h. In the
case of Puduc herry also, the President
ca n legisla te by makin g regula ti ons but
only wh en the Assem bly is suspe nded
or dissol ved . A regula tion so made has
the sa me force and effe ct as an act of
Parlia m ent. It m ay also repeal or amen d
an y act of Parlia me nt in relat ion to
th ese union te rritori es.
(ii) The govern or is empowered to direct that
an act of Pa rliame n t does not a ppl y to a
sched uled area in the state or a pply with
specified modif ica tion s a nd excep tions.
(iii) Th e Gover nor of Assa m may likewi se
direct that an act of Parlia ment does
not a pply to a tr ibal area (auton om ous
di strict) in the state or apply with sp ecifi ed modif icati ons and excep tions. The
Presid ent enj oys the same power with
resp ect to tr ibal ar eas (a u to nom ous
distri cts) in Megh alaya , Tripu ra and
Mizor am .

!I IDistribution of Legislative Subjects
The Const itution provides for a three-fold distribut ion of legisla tive subjec ts betwe en the
Cen tre and th e states, viz. , List-I (the Un ion
List), Li st-II (the State Li st) and List-HI (the
Con curren t List) in th e Seven th Sch edul e:
(i) The Parlia ment has excl usive powers to
make laws with respect to any of the
matte rs enum erated in the Union List .
This list ha s at presen t 98 subj ects (originall y 97\ subj ects) like defe n ce, ba nkin g, fo re ign affair s, curren cy, ato mic
I

Even now, the last entry is numbered as 97 but the
total number of entries is 98. The entries numbered
as 2A, 92A and 9ZB have been added and entries 33,
92 and 92C have been omitted.

~, 145

en e rgy, in sura n ce, co mmu ni catio n ,
inter-s tate trade and comm erce, cen sus,
audit and so on.
(ii) The state legi slature h as "in n ormal circum sta nces" exclus ive p owers to m ake
laws with resp ect to any of the matte rs
enum erated in the State Li st. This ha s
at presen t 59 subj ects (origi n all y 66 2
subj ects) like public order, police , publi c health and sanita tion , agri culture,
prison s, local gover nm ent, fish eries, .
m arkets , theate rs, gamb ling and so on .
(iii) Both , the Pa rli a ment a nd state legi slature can make laws with respec t to
any of th e m atters enum erated in the
Concu rrent List . This list h as at presen t
52 subj ects (o rigina ll y 473 subjects) like
crimin al law and proce dure, civil procedure, marri age and divorce, popul ati on
contro l and famil y pl annin g, electr i city, labou r welfare, econ omic and social
pl annin g , drugs, newsp a pers, b ooks and
p rint ing p ress, a nd others. Th e 42nd
Amen dmen t Act of 1976 transferred fi ve
subjec ts to Concu rrent List from Sta te
List, that is, (a) educa tion, (b) forest s,
(c) weigh ts and measu res, (d) protection of wild anima ls and birds, and (c)
admin istratio n of just ice; consti tutio n
and organ isatio n of all courts excep t the
Supre me Court and th e high courts.
(iv) The Parlia ment has power to make laws
with respect to any m atter for any part
of the territo ry of India not included in a
state even though that matter is one which
is enume rated in the State List. This provision has referen ce to the Union Thrritories
or the Acqui red Thrrito ries (if any).
(v) The 101 st Amen dmen t Act of 2016 has
made a special provi sion with resp ect
to goods and se rvi ces tax. Accor dingly,
Even now, the last entry is numbered as 66 but the
total number of entries is 59. The entries numbered
as 11 , 19, 20, 29, 36, 52 and 55 have been omitted.
3 Even now, the last entry is numbered as 47 but
the
total numbe r of entries is 52. The entries numbered
as llA, 17A, 17B, 20A and 33A have been added.

2

I

\

I

I

I

I

\

I

I

146

P

Indian Polity

the Parliament and the state legi slature
have power to make laws with respect
to goods and services tax imposed by
the Union or by the State. Further, the
parliament has exclusive power to make
laws with respect to goods and services
tax where the supp ly of goods or se rvices or both takes place in the course
of inter-state trade or commerce.
(vi) T he power to make Jaws with respect to
residuary subjects (i.e., the matters which
are not enumerated in any of the th ree
lists) is vested in the Parliament. This
residuary power of legislation includes
the powe r to levy residuary l:.:1.xes.
From the above scheme, it is clear that the
matters of national importance and the matters which require uniformity of legislation
natio nwide are included in the Un ion List. The
matlers of regional and local importance and
the matters which permit diversity of interest
are speci fied in the State Li st. The matters on
which uniformity of legislation throughout
the country is desirable but not essential are
enumerated in the concurrent li st. Thus, it
pe rmits di versity along with uniformity.
In US, only the powers of the Federal Government are enumerated in the Constitution
and the residuary powers are left to the sta tes.
The Au stralian Const itution fo ll owed the
American pattern of single enumeration of
powers. In Ca nada , on the other hand, there
is a double enumeration-Federal a nd Provincia l, a nd the residuary powers are vested in
the Centre.
The Government of India Act of ] 935 provided for a three-fold enumerat ion, viz., federal, provincial and concurrent. The present
Constitution follows the sc heme of thi s act
but with one difference, that is, under this
act, the residuary powers were given n either
to the federal leg islature nor to the provincial leg islature but to the Governor-Genera l
of India. In this respect, India follows th e
Canadia n precedent.
The Constitution expressly secures the predomin ance of the Uni on List over the State
List and the Concurrent List and that of the

Concurren t List over the State List. Thus, in
case of overlapping between the Union List
and the State List, the former shou ld prevail.
In case of overlapp ing between the Union List
,md the Concurrent List, it is again the former
which should prevail. Where there is a confl ict
between the Concurre nt List and the State List,
it is the former that should prevail.
In case of a conflict between the Ce ntra l law
and t he state law on a subject enum erated in
the Conc urrent List, the Central law prevails
over the state law. But, there is an exception.
If the state law has been reserved for the consideration of the President and has received
hi s/her assent, then the state law prevails in
that state. But, it would still be com petent for
th e Parliament to override such a law by subseque ntl y making a law on the sa me matter.

II Parliamentary Legislation
in the State Field

The above scheme of distribution of legislative powers between the Centre and the sta tes
is to be maintained in normal times. But, in
abnormal times, the scheme of distr ibu tion is
eithe r modified or suspended. In other words,
the Co nstitu tion empowers the Parliament to
make laws on any matter enumerated in t he
Sta te List under the following five extraordinary circumsta n ces:
A . When Rajya Sabha Passes a Resolution If
the Rajya Sabha declares that it is necessary in
the national interest that Parliament should
make laws with respect to goods and services
tax 3a or a matter in the State List, then the
Parliament becomes co mpetent to make laws
on that matter. Such a resolution must be supported by two-thirds of the me mbers present
and vot ing. The resolution rema ins in force
for one year; it can be renewed any number
of times but not exceeding one year at a tim e.
The laws cease to have effect on the expiration of six months after the resolution has
ceased to be in force.
3a.y-he provision for goods and services t.ax was added
by the JOi st Amendment Act of20J6.

Centre-State Relations

This provis ion does not restric t-the power
of a state legisla ture to make laws on the same
matter . But, in case of incon sisten cy betwe en
a state law and a parlia menta ry law, the latter
is to prevai1.
B. Durin g a Natio nal Emer gency The
Parlia ment acqui res th e power to legisla te
.
with respec t to goods an d servlc
es tax 3b or
matte rs in the State List, while a procla mation of nation al emerg ency is in opera tion.
The laws becom e inope rative on the expira tion of six month s after the emerg e ncy has
ceased to operat e.
Here also, the power of a state legisl ature
to make laws on the same matte r is not
restric ted. But, in case of repug nancy betwe en
a state law and a parlia menta ry law, the latter
is to prevai l.
C. When State s Make a Requ est When
the legisla tures of two or more states pass
resolu tions reque sting the Parlia ment to
enact laws on a matte r in the State List, then
the Parlia ment can make laws for regula ting
that matter . A law so enacte d applie s only to
those states which have passed the resolu tions.
However, any other state may adopt it afterwards by passin g a resolu tion to that effect in
its legisla ture. Such a law can be amen ded or
repeal ed only by the Parlia ment and not by
the legisla tures of the conce rned states.
The effect of passin g a resolu tion under
the above provis ion is that the Parlia ment
becom es entitle d to legisla te with respec t to
matte r for which it has no power to make a
law. On the other hand, the state legisl ature
ceases to have the po\ver 'to make a law with
respec t to that matte r, The resolu tion operates as abdic ation or surren der of the power
of the state legisl ature with respec t to that ·
matte r and it is placed entire ly in the hands
of Parlia ment which alone can then legisl ate
*ith respec t to it . .
Some examp les of laws passed under the
above provis ion are Priz'e Comp etition Act,
19S5j Wild Life (Prote ction) Act, 1972j Water

a

3bfbid.

~, 147

(Prev ention and Contr ol of Pollut ion) Act,

1974j Urban Land (Cei ling and Regul ation)
Act, 1976j and Trans planta tion of Huma n
Organ s Act, 1994.

D. To Implement International Agreements
The Parlia ment can make laws on any matte r
in the ~tate List for' imple menti ng the intern ationa l treatie s, agree ments or conve ntions .
This provis ion enabl es the Centr al gover nment to fulfil its intern ationa l obliga tions
and comm itmen ts.
Some examp les of laws enacte d under the
abov,e provis ion are United Nations (Privileges
and Immu nities) Act, 1947; Geneva Conve ntion
Act, 1960; Anti-H ijackin g Act, 1982 and legislations relatin g to enviro nmen t and TRJPS.
E. Durin g Presi dent' s Rule When the
Presid ent's rule is impos ed in a s!4te, the
Parlia ment becom es empow ered to m ake laws
with respec t to any matte r in the State List in
relatio n to that state. A law made so by the
Parlia ment contin ues to be opera tive even
after the presid ent's "rule. This means that the
period for which such a law remai ns in force
is not coterm inous with the durati on of the
President's rule. But, such a law can be repealed
or altere d or re-enacted by the state legisla tu re.

II Centre's Control Over State
Legis lation
Besides the Parlia ment' s power to legisl ate
direct ly on the state subjec ts under the exceptiona l situat ions", the Const it ution empow ers
the Centr e to exerci se contro l over the state's
legisla tive matte rs in the follow ing ways:
( i) The Governor can reserve a bill ~assed. by
the state legisla ture for the conSideratIo n
of the Presid ent. It must be noted h ere
that the Presid ent enjoy s absolu te veto
over such a bill (Artic les 200 and 201).
(ii) A state bill impos ing restric tions o.n the
freedo m of trade, comm erce and mtercourse with that state or within that
state can be introd uced in the legisla ture
of the state on ly with the previo us sa n ction of the Presid ent (Artic le 304).

148

P

Indion Polity

(iii ) The Ce ntre ca n direct th e sta tes to
reserve money bills and othe r financial
bills passed by the sta te leg islature for
the President's co nsideration during a
finan cia l e mergen cy (A rticl e 360).
(iv) The Governor c.ln not make an ordinance without the in st ruction s from th e
President in ce rulin cases (Articl e 213).
From the above, it is cleM that the Co nstitution has assigned a position of superi ority
to the Ce ntre in the legislative sph e re. In this
co ntext, the Sa rkaria Co mm iss ion on CentreSta te Rela tions ( 1983-88) obse n 'ed: "The rule
of federa l su premacy is a technique to avoid
absurd ity, resolve co nflict a nd e nsure harmony betwee n the Un ion and state laws. If
this prin cipl e of union su pre macy is excl uded,
it is not difficul t to imag ine its deleteriou s
resu lts. There will be eve ry possibi li ty of our
two-tier poli tica l syste m bei ng stultifi ed by
inte rfe rence, strife, lega l c haos and con fus ion
caused by (l host of co nflicti ng laws, mu ch
to t he bewilderm ent of the co mmon citizen.
Integrated legisla ti ve policy and unifonni ty on
bas ic issues of co mmon Unio n-state con cern
will be stym ied. The federal princip le of unity
in diversity will be very mu ch a casualty. Thi s
rul e of fede ral supremacy, therefore, is indispen sable for th e successful functioning of the
federal system ... .J

t ADMINISTRATIVE RELATIONS
Articles 256 to 263 in Part XI of th e Con stitu tio n dea l with the admin istrat ive relat io ns
betwee n the Ce n t re and t he states. In addition, there are vario us other articl es pertaining to the sa me matter.

II IDistribution of Executive Powers
The execu tive p owe r has be e n di vided
betwee n the Ce ntre a nd th e states on th e
lines of th e distribution of legislat ive powers,
except in few cases. Thus, the execll tive power
4Report ofche Com mi ssio n o n centrc-statc Rci'Hio ns,
Part I (Govcrnmcnl oflndia, 1988) pp. 28-29.

of t he Ce ntre extends to the whole of Indi a:
(i) to th e matters on which the Parliament
has exclus ive power of legislation ( Le., the
subjects en um erated in the Uni on Li st); and
(ii) to the exercise of rights, authority and
ju ri sd ict ion co nferred on it by any treaty o r
agreeme nt. Simila rl y, th e executive power of
a state exte nds to its te rr itory in respect of
matters on which the state leg islature ha s
excl usive powe r of leg islation (Le., the subj ects e num erated in the State List).
In respect of matters on which both th e
Parliam ent a nd the state leg islatu res ha ve
power of legi slat io n ( i.e., the subjects enum e rated in the Concurrent List), th e executive
power rests with th e sta tes exce pt when a Co nstitut ion al provision or a parl iam e n tary la w
specifically co nfe rs it on the Centre. T herefore, a law on a co ncurrent subject, t hough
enacted by the Pa rliamen t, is to be executed
by the sta tes except when the Co nstitution o r
the Parl ia men t has directed otherwise. 5

fl iObligation of States and the Centre
The Co nstitution has placed two rest rictions
on the execu tive powe r of th e sta tes in o rder to
give ample scope to the Ce ntre for exercising
its execu ti ve power in a n unrestricted ma nn er.
T hus, the executive power of every sla te is to
be exe rcised in such a way (a) as to e nsure
co mplian ce with th e la ws made by the Parliament and any existi ng law which apply in the
state; and (b) as not to impede or prejudice
the exercise of executive power of the Centre in
th e state. While the former lays down a general
ob ligation upo n the sta te, the latter imposes a
specific obl igatio n on the state not to hamper
the executive power of the Ce ntre.
J n bot h th e cases, the executive powe r of
th e Centre extends to giv ing of such directio ns to the sta te as are necessa ry for the
purpose. The sanction behind these direct ions
of t he Centre is coercive in naturc. Thus, Articl e 365 says that where a ny state ha s failed to
5 For example, under the Essential Commod itics Act,

m" de by the Parliame nt. o n a concurrcnt subject,
the executive pO\\·er is l'cst(.'(! in the Cc n tre.

Centre-State Relations

comp ly wit~ (or to give effect to) any direc·
tions given by the Ce ntre, it will be lawful
for th e Presid ent to hold that a situat ion has
arisen in which the gover nmen t of the state
ca nnot be ca rried on in accord ance with the
provis ion s of the Co nstitu tion. It mean s that,
in such a situat ion, the Presid ent's rul e ca n
be impos ed in th e state under Articl e 356.

11 \Centre 's Directions to the States
in additi on to the above two cases, th e Centr e

is empo wered to give direct io ns to the states
with regard to the exe rcise of their execu tive
power in the follow ing matters:
(i) the con stru ct ion an d maint en an ce of
mea ns of comm unica tion (decla red to
be of nation al or milita ry impor tance)
by the state; .
(ii) the m easure s to be taken for the protec ·
tion of the railwa ys within the state;
(i ii) the provis ion of adequ ate facilit ies for
j n stru c~ ion in the mothe r·tong ue at the
prima ry stage of edu cation to children
b elong ing to lingui sti c minor ity group s
in the state; and
(iv) the drawi ng up and execu tion of the
specif ied sch emes for the welfar e of the
Sched uled Tribes in the state.
The coerci ve sancti on behin d th e Centr al
direct ions und er Articl e 365 (men tione d
above ) is also applic able in these cases.

El lMutual Delegation of Functions
The distrib ution of legisla tive powers between
th e Ce ntre and the sta tes is rigid . Con sequ ently, the Centr e canno t delega te its legislative power s to the states 'and a single state
canno t reque st the Parlia ment to make a law
on a state subjec t. The distrib ution of executive power in gener al follows the di stribu tion
of legisla tive powers. But, such a rigid division in th e executive sphere may lead to occas ional confli cts b etwee n the two. Hen ce, the
Const itution provid es for inter- gover nmen t
delega tion of execu tive functi ons in order
to mitiga te rigidit y and avoid a situatio n of
dea dlock.

~, 149

Acco rdingl y, the Presid ent may, with the
co nsent of th e state gove rnm ent, entrus t to
that gover nmen t any of the execu tive functions of the Ce ntre. Conve rsely, the gover nor
of a state may, with th e con sent of the Central
gover nmen t, entru st to that gover nmen t any
of the ·execu tive functi ons of the state. 6 This
mutua l delega tion of admin istrati ve fun ctions
may be co nditio nal or unco nditio n al.
The Con stituti on also makes a provis ion
for the entrustment of the executive fun ctions
of the Centre to a state witho ut the con sent of
that state. But, in this case, the delega tion is by
the Parlia m ent and not by the presid ent. Thus,
a law made by the Parlia ment on a subject of
th~ Union Li st can confe r power s and impose
duties on a state, or autho rise the confe rring of
power s and imposition of duties by the Centre
upon a state (irresp ective of the conse nt of the
state conce rned). Notably, the same thing ca nnot be done by the state legislature.
From th e above, it is clear that the mutua l
delega tio n of fun cti on s betwe en the Centre
and the state ca n take pla ce either under
an agree ment or by a legisla tion. While the
Centr e ca n use both the metho ds, a state ca n
use onl y th e first m ethod .

E! Cooperation detween the Centre
and State s

Th e Con stituti on conta ins the following provision s to sec'ure coope ration and coo rdination betwe e n the Centr e a nd the states:
(i) The Parlia ment can provid e for the adju·
dicati on of any dispu te or co mplai nt
with respec t to the use, distrib ution and
contro l of waters of any inter- state river
and river valley.
(ii) The Presi dent ca n esta blish (und er
Articl e 263) an Inter- State Coun cil to
in vestigate and di scuss subj ect of common interest betwe en the Centre a nd the
states. Such a counc il was set up in 1990.
&rhis provision (the power of the states to entrus t
fun ctions to the Centre ) was added by the 7th
Consti tutiona l Amend ment Act of 1956. Before
that, only the Cen tre had the power.

150 ,~ Indian Polity
(iii) Full faith and credit is to be given
throughout the territory of India to publi c acts, reco rds and judicial proceedi ngs
of the Centre and every state.
(i v) The Parliament can appoint an appropriate authority to carry out the purposes of the con st itutional provisions
relating to the interstate freedom of
trade, commerce and intercourse. But,
no such authority ha s been appointed
so far.

El lAtI~lndia Services
Like in any other federation, the Centre and
the states also have their separate publiC se rvices called as the Central Services and the
State Services respect ivel y. In addition, there
arc All-India Services-lAS, IPS and IFaS. The
members of these se rvi ces occupy top positions (or key posts) under both the Ce ntre and
the states and serve them by turns. But, they
are recruited and trained by the Ce ntre.
These serv ices are controlled jointly by the
Centre and the states. The ultimate control
lies with the Central government while the
immediate control vests with the state governments.
In 1947, Indian Civil Service (ICS) was
replaced by lAS and the Indian Police (IP)
was replaced by IPS and were recognised by
the Constitution as All-India Services. In 1966,
the Indian Forest Serv ice (IFoS) was created
as the third All-India Service. Article 312 of
the Const itution authorises the Parliament to
create new All-India Services on the basis of
a Rajya Sabha resolution to that effect.
Each of these three All-India Services,
irrespective of their division among different
sta tes, form a single servi ce with co mmon
rights and sta tus and uniform sca les of pay
throughout the country.
Though the All-India Services violate the
principle of federalism under the Constitution
by restricting the autonomy and patronage of
the states, they are supported on the ground
that (i) they help in maintHining high standard
of administration in the Centre as well as in the
states; (ii) they help to ensure uniformity of the

administrative syste m throughout the country;
and (iii) they facilitate liaison, cooperation,
coordination and joint action on the issues
of common interest between the Centre and
the states.
\Vhile justifying the institution of all-India
services in the Constituent Assembly, Dr. B.R.
Ambedkar observed that: "The dual polity
which is inherent in a federal system is followed in all federations by a dual service. In
all federations, there is a Federal Civil Service
and a State Civil Service. The Indian federation, though a dual polity, will have a dual
se rvice, but with one exception. It is recogni sed that in every country there are ce rtain
posts in its administrative set up which might
be called stra tegic from the point of view of
maintaining the standard of administration.
There can be no doubt that the standard of
a dministration depends upon the calibre of
the civil servants who are appointed to the
strategic posts. The Co nstitution provides that
without depriving the states of their rights
to form their own civil serv ices, there shall
be an all-India service, recruited on an allIndia basis with common qualifica tion s, with
uniform sca le of pay and members of which
alone could be appointed to those strategic
posts throughout the Union~.7

II IPublic Service Commissions
In the field of public service commissions, the
Centre-state relations are as follows:
(i) The Chairman and members of a state
public service commission, though
appointed by the governor of the sta te,
can be removed only by the President.
(ii) The Parliament can establish a Joint St.1.te
Public Service Commission (JSPSC) for
two or more states on the request of the
state legislatures concerned. The chairman and members of the JSPSC are
appointed by the President.
(iii) The Un ion Public Service Commission
(U PSC) can serve the needs of a state
on the request of the state governor and
with the approval of the President.
7Cons ritZlelll Assembly Debates, Volume VII, rp· 41-42.

______________________________________________________~C=e~

nt~re~S~ta~re~R~el~a"~·o~n~s_~
~" 151

(i v) The upse ass ists the states (wh e n
reque sted by two or more states ) in
frami ng a nd o perati ng schem es of joint
recrui tment for a ny servic es for which
candi dates posse ssing specia l qualif ications are required .

III !Integrated Judic ial System

\

Thoug h India ha s a dual po1ity, there is no
dua l system of admin istrat ion of justic e.
The Con stituti on, on the other hand, established an integr ated judici al syste m with the
Supre me Court at the top a nd the state hi gh
co urts b elow it. This si n gle syste m of courts
enforc es both the Centra l laws as well as the
state laws. This is done to elimin ate divers ities in the remedial proce dure.
Th e judge s of a state hi gh court a re
appoi nted by the Presid e nt in con sul tation
with the Chi ef Justic e of India a nd the gove rnor of the state. They can also be transf e rred
an d remov ed by the Presid ent.
The Pa rli ame nt can estab li sh a co m mon high court for two or more sta tes. For
examp le, Maha rashtr a and Goa or Punja b an d
Harya na h ave a com mon high court .

II IRelations During Emergenci es
( i) Durin g the opera tion of a nation al emergency ( under Articl e 352) , the Centre
becom es e ntitl ed to give execu tive direction s to a state on 'any' matte r. Thus, the
state govern ments a re broug ht unde r the
co mplet e contro l of the Centre , th ough
they are not suspe nded.
(ii) When the Presid ent's Rule is impos ed in
a state (unde r Articl e 356), the Presid ent
can assum e to himse lf/her self the functions of t he state gover nmen t and PO\Vers vested in the Gove rnor or any oth e r
execut ive autho rity in th e state.
(iii) Durin g the ' opera tion of a financ ia l
e merge ncy ( und er Articl e 360), the
Centr e can direct the states to observ e
ca non s of financ ial propr iety an d ca n
give other neces sary direct ions includ ing th e reduc tion of sala ries of perso ns
servin g in the state.

IIiI IO ther Provisions
Th e Con stituti on conta ins the fo llowin g oth er
provis ions wh ich enabl e the Cen t re to exe rcise contro l ove r the state admin i stratio n:
( i) Articl e 355 impos es two duties o n the
Centre: (a) to protec t every state agains t
extern a l aggre ssion and intern al disturban ce; and (b) to e n sure that the
gover nment of every state is carrie d on
in accord ance with the provis ions of the
Const itution .
(ii) The govern or of a state is appoi nted by
the Presid ent. He/ sh e holds office during
the pleasu re of th e Preside nt. In a ddition to the Const ituti onal head ·of the
state, the govern or acts as an agent of
the Centre in the state. He/ sh e submi ts
period ical report s to th e Centre about the
admin istrati ve affairs of the state.
(iii) Th e state electio n comm ission e r, thoug h
appoi nted by the gove rnor of the state,
ca n be removed only by the Presid ent.

111 1Extra-Constitutional Devices
In additi on to th e above -m e ntione d con stitutional devices, there are extra-co n stitu tional
device s to promo te coope ration and coord i nation betwe en the Centre and th e states. These
includ e a numb er of adviso ry b odies and
con ferenc es held a t the Centr al level.
The non-c onstit utiona l adviso ry bodi es
includ e th e NIT! Ayog (wh ich succe eded t he
pla nning co mmis sion ), th e Natio n a l Integr ation Counc il, the Cen tral Counc il of Healt h
and Famil y Welfare, the Ce ntra l Coun c il of
Local Gover nment , the Zo n al Counc il s, the
North-Easte rn Coun cil , the Centr al Coun cil
of Indian Medic ine, the Ce ntral Coun cil of
Hom oeopa thy, th e Trans port Devel opme nt
Counc il , the Unive rsity Grant s Co mmi ssion
and so on.
The impo rta nt co nfere nces h eld eith er
a nnu all y or oth erwise to facilit ate Centr e state co n sultati on on a wide range of matte rs
are as foll ows: (i) Th e gover nors' co nference (pres ided over by the Presid ent). (ii)
The chief mini sters' confe re nce ( presid ed
over by th e prim e minis ter). (iii) The chief

152

•

Indian Po/"

secre taries' co n fe re nce ( presided over by the
cabin et secretary). (iv) The co nferen ce of
in spec tor-ge ne ral of poli ce. (v) The ch ief
j ustices' co nference (p res ided ove r by the
chi ef justi ce of Indi a). (vi) T he co nfe re nce
of vice-cha ncell ors. (vii) T he home mini sters' co nference (pres ided over by the Ce ntral
home mini ste r). (viii) The law mini sters'
co nferen ce (pres ided over by the Central law
minister).

t FINANCIAL RELATIONS
Articles 268 to 293 in Part XI I of the Co nstituti on deal with Centre-state finan c ia l relations. Besides these, there a re other provisions
dea li ng with the sa me subj ect. These together
ca n be st ud ied under the fo ll owing hea ds:

II IAllocati on of Taxing Powers
The Co nstitution di vi des the taxing powers
between th e Centre a nd the states in th e fo llowing way:
• The Parl iament has exclusive power to
levy taxes on subjects enum erated in the
Un ion List (whi ch are 13 in numberil).
• The state leg islature has exclusive power
to levy taxes on subj ects enum era ted in
the State List (which are 18 in number9).
• There are no tax entries in the Concurrent
Li st. In other words, the conc urrent j uri sdi ction is not ilVaiiable with respect to tax
legislation. But, the 101 st Amendment Act
of2016 has made an exception by making
a special provision wi th respect to goods
and se rvices tax. Th is Amendm ent has
con ferred co ncurrent power upon the
Parliament and St.'lte Legislatures to make
laws govern in g goods and services t.'lXIO.
• The residuary power of taxation (that is,
the powe r to impose Lues not enumerated in a ny of the th ree lists) is vested in
8Entr ies-82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92A,
92B and 96.
9 En tr ies-45, 46, 47, 48. 49. 50, 5 1,53,54,56,57,58,
59. 60, 61, 62, 63 and 66.
lO i n t h is regard , t he JO ist Amendme nt Act of 2016

inserted Article 246-A in the Co nstitution .

the Parl iament. Under th is provision, the
Parlia ment has imposed gift tax, wealth
tax and expe nditu re t.'lX.
The Co nst itution also draws a distin ctio n
between the power to levy and collect a t.1X
and the power to appropriate the proceeds of
the tax so lev ied and coll ected. For example,
the in co me-tax is lev ied and collected by the
Ce ntre but its proceeds are distributed between
the Ce ntre and th e states.
Fu rther, th e Co nstitution has pla ced the
fo llowin g restriction s o n th e taxing powers
of the states:
(i) A state legislature can impose taxes on
professio ns, trades, ca llings and e mployments. But, the tota l a mount of such
taxes payab le by any person should not
exceed 't2,SOO per ann um . II
(ii) A state leg islat ure is prohibited from
imposi ng a tax on th e su pply of goods
or se rvices or both in the following
two cases: (a) where suc h su ppl y
takes pl ace outs ide th e sta te; and (b)
where such suppl y takes pla ce in the
cou rse of import or export. Further, the
Parliam e nt is em powered to formulate
the prin ciples for determi ning when a
suppl y of goods or se rvices or both takes
pl ace outs id e the state, or in the co urse
12
.
o f 1mport or ex port .
(iii) A state legis lature can impose tax on
the co n sumpt ion or sa le of electricity.
But, no tax ca n be imposed on the co nsumpti o n or sale of electricity which
is (.iii) co n sumed by the Ce ntre or so ld
to the Ce ntre; or (b) consumed in the
co nstruction, mai ntenance o r operation
of any railway by the Centre or by the
co nce rn ed railway com pany or sold to
th e Ce ntre o r the ra ilway com pany for
the sa me purpose.
( i v) A sta te leg is lat ure can impose a tax in
respect of any water or electricity stored,
ge n e rated, co n su med, di stributed or
llO rig ina lly, (his limit was o nly 't2 50 per annum .
The 60th Am endm ent Act of 1988 ra ised it to
n,500 per annum .
l4rhese prov isions Me contained in Article 286, as
amended by the JOi st Amendment Act of2016.

Centre-State Relations

sold by any authority estab lished by
Parliame nt for regulating or develop·
iog any inter-state river or rive r vaHey.
But, such a law, to be effective, should
b e reserved for the president's conside ration and receive hi s/ her assent.

l

!I IDistribution of Tax Revenues
Th e 80th Amendment Act of 2000 and the
101st Amendment Act of 2016 have introduced
m ajor changes in the scheme of the distribution of tax revenues between the ce ntre a nd
the states.
Th e 80th ,Amendment was e nacted to give
effect to the recommendations of the 10th
fina nce Commi ssion. The Commi ssion recomme nded that out of the total inco me obtained
from certain cen tral taxes an d duti es, 29%
should go to the states. This is known as the
'Alternative Schem e of Devolution' a nd came
into effect retrospectively from April I, 1996.
Th is amendment has brought several central
taxes and duties like Corporation lax and
Customs Duties at par with Income 13x (taxes
on income other than agricultural income) as
far as their con stitutionally ma ndated sharing
with the states is concerned. 13
The 101st Ame ndment has paved the way
for the introduction of a new tax regime (Le.,
goods a nd services tax - GST) in the country.
Accordingly, the Amendment conferred concurren t taxi ng powers upon the Parl iament and
the State Legislatures to make laws for levying
GST on every transaction of supply of goods or
services or both. The GST replaced a numbe r
of indirect taxes levied by the Union and the
State Governments and is intended to remove
the cascading effect of taxes and provide fo r a
co mmon national market for goods and services. The Amendmen t provided for subsuming of various central indirect taxes a nd lev ies
such as (i) Central Excise Duty, (ii) Addition al
Excise ' Duties, (iii) Excise Duty levied under
the Medicinal a nd Thilet Preparations (Excise

,

\

I~his amendment deleted Article 272 CUlxes which

are levied and collected by the Centre and may be
distributed between the Centre and the stales).

~, 153

Duties) Act, 1955, (iv) Service Thx, (v) Additional Customs Duty comm only known as
Coun tervailing Duty, (vi) Special Additional
Duty of Customs, a nd (vii) Central Surcharges
a nd Cesses so far as they related to the supply
of goods and services. Simila rly, the Ame ndment provided for subsuming of (i) State Value
Added 13x / Sales 13x, (ii) Entertainment 13x
(other than the tax levied by the loca l bodies),
(iii) Central Sales Thx (levied by the Centre and
collected by the States), (iv) Octroi and Entry
Thx, (v) Purchase Thx, (vi) Luxury Thx, (vii)
Thxes on lottery, betting and gambling, a nd
(viii) State Surcharges and Cesses in so far as
they related to the supply of goods and services.
Further, the Amendment deleted Article 268-A
as well as Entry 92-C in the Union List, both
were dealing with service tax. They were added
earlier by the 88th Amendment Act of 2003.
The service tax was levied by the Cen tre but
collected 'and appropriated by both the Centre
and the States.
After the above two amendme nts (Le. , 80th
Amendm ent and 101 st Amendment), the prese nt position with resp ect to the distribution
of tax revenues between the centre and the
states is as follows:
A. Taxes Levied by the Centre but Collected
and Appropriated by the States (Article 268):
This category includes the stamp duties on bil1s
of exchange, cheques, promissory notes, policies of insuran ce, transfer of shares and others.
The proceeds of these duties lev ied within
any state do n ot form a part of the Co nsolidated Fund of India, but are ass igned to that
state.
B. Taxes Levied and Collected by the Centre
but Assizned to the States (Article 269) :
The following taxes fa ll unde r thi s category:
(i) 13xes on the sale or purchase of goods
(other tha n n ewspapers) in th e course
of inte r·state trade or comm erce.
(i i) laxes on the consignm ent of goods in the
course of inter-state trade or comm erce.
The net proceeds of these taxes do not fonn
a part of the Co nsolidated Fu nd of India.
Th ey a re assign ed to the concern ed states in

154

P

,
Indian Polity

acco rda nce with the pri nciples lai d down by
th e Pa rl iame n t.
C . Lev y and Collection of Goods and
Services Tax in Course of Inter-State Trade
or Commerce (Article 269-A); The Goods
and Services Thx (CST) on suppli es in the
course of inter-sta te trade o r comme rce are
lev ied and co llected by th e Ce ntre. But, thi s
tax is divided betwee n t he Ce n tre and the
States in the manner provided by Parliam e nt
o n the reco mm e ndati ons of the GST Co un c il.
F'urther, the Parli ame nt is a lso aut hor ized to
formu late t he pr in cipl es for de termining the
p lace of suppl y, and whe n a supp ly of goods
o r se rvices or both takes place in the co urse
of inter-state trade or CO Jllm e rce.
D. Taxes Levied and Collected by the Centre
but Distributed between the Centre and the
States (Article 270): This ca tegory includes
all taxes a nd duti es referred to in the Un ion
List except the fo ll owi ng:
( i) Duties lind taxes refe r red to in Art icles
268, 269 and 269-A (me nti on ed a bove);
( ii ) Surcharge on taxes and duties referred to
in Article 271 (ment ioned be low); and
(iii) Any cess lev ied ror specific purposes.
The man nc r of distributio n of the net proceeds of these taxes a nd duties is presc ribed
by t he Preside nt on the recommendation of
the Fin ance Co mmi ss ion .
E. Surcharge on Certain Taxes and Duties
for Purposes of the Centre (Article 271) :
Th e Parliamen t can at a ny time levy the
surcha rges on taxes and duties referred to in
Articles 269 a nd 270 ( mentioned above). The
proceeds of such surcharges go to the Cent re
exclusive ly. In other words, the states have no
share in these surc harges.
Howeve r, the Goods and Services 13x (GST)
is exempted from this surc harge. In other
words, this surc harge ca n not be imposed on
the CST.

F. Taxes Levied and Collected and Retained

by the States :

T hese a rc the taxes belongi ng to t h e states excl us ively. They are
enu m erated in t h e st<lte li st and are 18

in n umber. These a rcH: (i) land revenu e;
(ii) taxes on agr ic ultura l income; (iii) duties
in respect of succession to agri cul tura l la nd ;
( iv) estate duty in respect of agricultural
land; (v) taxes on lands and bui ldings;
(v i) taxes on mineral ri ghts; (vii) Dut ies
of exc ise o n alcoho l ic l iquors fo r human
consum pt ion; op ium , Indian h emp and
o th er narco ti c drugs a nd narcotics, but not
incl udin g medicina l a nd toilet prepa ra ti ons
co ntainin g alco ho l o r narco t ics; (viii) taxes
on the co nsumpti o n or sa le or e lectrici ty;
(ix) taxes o n the sa le of petroleum crude,
h igh speed diese l, motor spirit (co mmonl y
known as petro l), natura l gas, €Iv iation turbin e fue l and alcoho l ic liquor for human
co nsumption , but not including sale in the
co urse of inter-state trade or com me rce or
sale in the co urse of i nternatio na l t rade or
com merce of suc h goods; (x) taxes on goods
a nd passe ngers ca rried by road or in land
waterways; (xi) taxes o n vehicl es; (x ii) taxes
on a ni ma ls and boats; (xi ii ) tolls; (xi v) taxes
on profess ions, trades, ca ll ings a nd emp loyme n ts; (xv) cap itation taxes; (xvi) taxes
on enterta inm ents a nd a mu se ments to the
exte nt lev ied and co ll ected by a Pa nc hayat
or a Muni c ipa lity or a Regiona l Co uncilor a
District Co un c il ; (x vii) sta mp duty on docu ments (except those spec ifi ed i n t he Uni o n
List); an d (xviii) fees on t he matte rs en umerated in t he Sta te List (exce pt co urt fees).

II IDistribution of Non-tax Revenues
A . The Centre The rece ipts from the fo ll owing form the major sources of non-tax reven ues of the Ce ntre: ( i) posts and te legraphs;
(ii) railways; (iii) banking; (iv) broadcas ting
(v) coinage ilnd c urrency; (vi) central public
sector e nterprises; (v ii) escheat and lapse;
a nd ("iii) othe rs.
14

Entry 52 (taxes onlhe entry of goods into a loc..l1 area

fo r consum ption, use o r sale therein) and entry 55

(til xes on advertisements other than advertisements
published in the newspapers and adve rtisemen ts
broadcast by radio or telev isio n) were omitted by the
JO ist Amendment Act of2016.

Centre-State Relations

B. The States The rece ipts from the following form the major source s of non-ta x revenues of th e states: (i) irriga tion; (ii) forests;
(iii) fisher ies; (iv) state publi c sector enterprises ; (v) esche at and lapse; and (vi) others.

D IGrants-in-Aid to the State s
Besides sharin g of taxes betwe en the Centr e
and the states, the Const itution provid es for
grants -in-aid to the states from th e Centra l
resources. There are two types of grants-in-aid,
viz, statut ory grants and discre tionar y grants :
A. Statut ory Crant s Articl e 275 empow ers
the Parlia ment to make grants to the states
which are in need of financ ial assista nce and
not to every state. Also, differe nt sums may
be fixed for differ ent states. These sum s are
charge d on the Conso lidate d Fund of India
every year.
Apart from this gener a l provis ion, the
Co n stituti on also provid es for speC ifi c grants
for promo ting the welfare of th e sched uled
tribes in a stale or for rai sing the level of
admin istrati on of the sch eduled areas in a
state includ ing the State of Assa m.
The statut ory grants under Articl e 275
(both gener al and specific) are given to the
states on the reco mmen dation of the Finan ce
Comm ission .
B. Discre tionar y Grant s Articl e 282 empowers both the Centr e and the states to make
any grants for any public purpo se, eve n if
it is not within the ir respec tive leg islativ e
compe tence. Undet· this provis ion, the Centr e
m akes grants to the states.
"These grants are also known as discre tionary grants , the reason being that the Centre is
under no obli gation to give these grants and
the matte r li es within its discre tion. These
grants have a two-fol d purpo se: to help the
state finan cially to fulfil plan targets; and to
give some levera ge to the Centr e to influe n ce
and coord inate state action to effect uate th e
n ationa l plan.HIS
Jain: Indian Constitutional Law, Wadhwa ,
Fourth Edition, pp. 342-43.

15 M . P.

~ 155

C. Other Grant s The Co nstitu tion also
provid ed for a third type of grants-in-a id,
but for a tempo rary period . Thus, a provision was made for .g ra nts in lieu of expor t
duties on jute and jute produ cts to the States
of Assam , Bihar, Orissa and West Benga l.
These grants were to be given for a period
of ten years from the comm en cemen t of th e
Const itution . These sums were charge d on the
Conso lidate d Fund of India and were made
to the states on the recom mend ation of the
Finan ce Co mmis sio n.

aI

Good s and Servi ces Tax Coun cil

The smoot h and effici ent admin istrati o n of
the goods and se rvices tax (GST) requir es a
co-ope ration and co-ord inatio n betwe en the
Ce ntre and the Sta tes. In order to faci1itate
this con sultat ion process, the 101 st Amen dm ent Act of 2016 provided for th e establ i shment of a Goods and Servic es Tax Coun cilor
the CST Counc il.
Articl e 279-A empo wered the Presid ent to
co nst itute a GST Counc il by an order l6 . Th e
Coun cil is a jOint forum of the Centre and
the States. It is required to make recom mendati ons to the Centr e and the States o n the
follow ing matte rs:
(a) The taxes, cesses and surch arges lev ied
by the Centre , the States a nd the loca l
bodie s that would get merge d in GST.
(b) The goods a nd services th at may be subjected to GST or exemp ted from GST.
(e) Model GST Laws, princi ples ortevy, apportionm ent of GST lev ied on suppl ies in
th e course of inter-state trade or co mmerce a nd the prin ciples that gover n
th e place of suppl y.
(d) The thresh old limit of turnov er below
which goods a nd serv ices may b e
exemp ted from GST.
Article 279-A( 1) says that the President shall,
within sixty days from the commencement
of the Constitutio n (One Hundred and First
Amendment) Act, 2016, by order, constit ute a
Counc il to be called the Goods and Services Tax
Council.

16

156 ,r1lndian Polity
(c) The niles includ in g noar rates with bands
of CST.
(f) Any spec ia l rate or rates for a specified
pe r iod to raise <ldd it iona l reso urces during a ny na tural calamity o r disa ster.

[I IFinance Commission
Article 280 provides for <J Fin a nce Com mission as a quasi-judi c ia l body. It is co nstituted
by the President every fifth yea r or eve n earli er. It is requ ired to make recommendations
to the Preside nt o n the fo ll ow ing ma tters:
• The d istrib ut io n of th e n et proceeds of
taxes to be sha red between the Cen tre
a nd the states, a nd the a llo ca ti o n
between the states, the respect ive shares
of such proceeds.
• T he prin c iples which shou ld gove rn the
grants-i n-aid to the states by the Centre
( Le. , out of t he Co nso lidated Fund of
Ind ia).
• T he meas ures needed to a ugme nt the
Co nso lidated fund of a sta te to su ppl ement the resou rces of t he panchayats
a nd th e Illunicipalities in the sta te o n
the bas is of the recomme ndat io ns made
17
by the State Finance Comm issi on .
• Any other matte r refe rred to it by the
Pres id e nt in the int e rests of sou nd
fina nce.
Till ] 960, the COlll mi ssio n <l lso suggested
the a mounts paid to the Sta tes of Assam, Bihar,
Orissa and West Bengal in li eu of assignm e nt
of any share of the net proceeds in each year
of ex port du ty on jute and jute produ cts.
The Cons titu ti on e nvisages the Fi n ance
Co mm iss ion as the balan c ing wh eel of fiscal
fede ral is m in Indi a.

II IProtection of the States ' Interest
To protect the in te rest of states in the fi na ncia l matters, the Co nst itu t ion lays down that
the fo ll owi ng bills CH n be introduced in the
l'This fun ction was added by the 73rd and 74th
Amendme nt Acts of 1992 whi ch have granted
constilUliona l SlatllS o n the panchayats and the
municipalities respectively.

Parl iament o nl y on th e recommendat ion of
the Pres id e n t:
• A bill whi ch imposes o r va r ies a ny tax
or duty in whi c h stiHCS are in terested;
• A bill whi ch var ies the mcaning of the
express ion 'ag ri c ultural income' as
defined fo r t he purposes of th e enactments re lat in g to Indian income t.."lx;
• A bill wh ich affects th e prin c ipl es on
wh ic h moneys are or ma)' be distributabl e to states; a nd
• A bill whic h imposes a ny surcharge on
any specified tax or duty for th e pu rpose
of th e Cen tre.
T he exp ressio n ~tax or duty in which states
arc interested" mca n s: (a) a tax o r duty t he
whole or part of the net p roceeds whereo f arc
assigned to <l ny st'lle; or (b) a tax or dut y by
refere nce to the net proceeds whereof sum s
are for the ti me bcing payab le, out of the
Co nso lid ated fund of Indi a to a ny swte.
The phra se 'net proceeds' means the proceeds of a tax or a duty m in tiS th e cost of co llect io n . The net proceeds of a tax o r a duty
in a n)' a rea is to be ascertai ned and cert ifie d
by the Comptroller find Auditor-Ge nera l of
In dia. Hi s/ her ce rtificate is fi nal.

[I Borrowing by the Centre
and the States

The Co nst itut ion makes the following provisio ns with rcgard to the borrowing powers o f
(he Ce n tre and the sta tes:
• The Ce ntra l govern ment can borrow e ither
withi n In dia o r outside upon thesecuri tyoftheCol1solid.atcd fundofIndiaor can
give guarantees, but both within the lim its
fixed by the Parliament. So far, no such law
has been ena cted by the Parlia ment.
• Simi la rl y. a st;:ltc government ca n borrow with in India (and not abroad) upon
the sec uri ty of the Consolidated Fund of
the State or cC:ln g ive gua rantees, but both
within the limit s fi xed by t he legislature
of that state.
• The Cc nt ra l gove rnm e nt can 111 ~l ke
loans to a ny stilte or give gua rantees i n
~

Centre-State Relations

respect of loans raised by any state. Any
sums required for the purpose of makw
ing such loans are to be charged on the
Consolidated Fund of India.
• A state cannot raise any loan without the
consent of the Centre, if there is sti11 outstanding any part of a loan made to the
state by the Centre or in respect of which
a guarantee has been given by the Centre.

a l inter-Governmental Tax Immunities

Like any other federa l Constitution, the
Indian Constitution also contain the rule of
'immunity from mutual taxation' and makes
the following provisions in this regard:

A. Exemption of Central Property from
State Taxation The property of Centre is
exempted from all taxes imposed by a state
or any auth0rity within a state like munici w
palities, district boards, panchayats and so on.
But, the Parliament is empowered to remove
this ban. The word 'property' includes lands,
buildings, chattels, shares, debts, everything
that has a money value, and every kind of
property-movable or immovable and tan w
gible or intangible. Further, the property may
be used for sovereign (like armed forces) or
commercial purposes.
The corporations or the companies created
by the Central government are not immune
from state taxation or local taxation. The
reason is that a corporation or a company is
a separate legal entity.
B. Exemption of State Property or Income
from Central Taxation The property and
income of a state is exempted from Central
taxation. Such income may be derived from
sovere ig'n functions or commercial functions.
But the Centre can tax the commercial operations of a state if Parliament so provides.
However, the Parliament can declare any
particular trade or business as incidental to
the ordinary functions of the government and
it would then not be taxable.
Notably, the property and income of local
a uthorities situated within a state are not

~ 157

exempted from the Central taxation. Similarly, the property or income of corporations
and companies owned by a state can be taxed
by the Centre.
The Supreme Court, in an advisory opinion 18 (1963), held that the immunity granted
to a state in respect of Central taxation does
not extend to the duties of customs or duties
of excise. In other words, the Centre can
impose customs duty on goods imported or
exported by a state, or an excise duty on goods
produced or manufactured by a state.

mi l Effects of Emergencies
The Centre-state financial relations in nor w
mal times (described above) undergo changes
during emergencies. These are as follows:
A. National Emergency Vlhile the proclamation of national emergency (under Article
352) is in operation, the President can modify
the constitutional distribution of revenues
between the Centre and the states. This means
that the President can either reduce or cancel
the transfer of finances (both tax sharing and
grants-in-aid) from the Centre to the states.
Such modification continues till the end of
the financial year in which the emergency
ceases to operate.
B. Financial Emergency While the proclamation of financial emergency (under
Article 360) is in operation, the Ce ntre can
give directions to the states: (i) to observe
the specified canons of financial propriety;
(ii) to reduce the sa laries and allowances of
al1 class of persons serving in the state; and
(iii) to reserve all money bi11s and other
financial bills for the consideration of the
President.

TRENDS IN CENTRE-STATE
RELATIONS
Till 1967, the centre-state relations by and
large were smooth due to one-party rule
18 In Re. Sea Customs Act (1963).

158

,r!'

Indian Polity

at th e Cent re and in mo st of the states.
In 1967 e lect ion s, the Co ngress party was
defeated in n in e states and its posit ion
at t h e Cent re becam e weak . Thi s ch anged
political sce na rio he rald ed a n ew era in th e
Ce n tre-state relation s. The no n-Congress
Gove rnm e n ts in th e st at es o pp osed the
in c reasing ce ntrali sat ion and in tervention
of the Ce n t ral gove rnm ent. They raised
th e iss ue of stat e a utonom y a nd de ma nd ed
m ore powers and finan cia l re so urces to t h e
states. This caused ten sion s a n d co nfli cts in
Centre- state re lations.

Tension Areas in Centre-State Relations
The issues which created tensions and confl icts
betwee n the Ce ntre and sta tes are:
(1) Mode o f ap pointm e nt a nd di sm issa l of
governor;
(2) Disc riminatory and pa rti san role of
governors;
(3) Imposi tion of Pres ide nt's Rule for p.a rtisan interests;
(4) Deploy m e nt of Centra l forces i n th e
states to mainta in la w and order;
(5) Rese rvation of sta te bi ll s for the co ns ideratio n of the Presiden t;
(6) Discr im in ation in fin a n cia l allocat ions
to the sta tes;
(7) Rol e of Pl a nning Commiss ion in a pprovin g sta te p roj ects; (till its re place me nt
by the NIT I Aayog in 2015);
(8) Ma nage me nt of All-Indi a Services ( lAS,
IPS, and IFoS);
(9) Use of e lectroni c media fo r politi ca l
pu rposes;
(10) Appo in tme nt of e nquiry commi ss ion s
against the chief mi n iste rs;
(11) Shar ing of fina nces ( between Ce ntre and
states);
(12) En croac h ment by the Cent re on t h e
Sta te Li st;
(13) Impl e m e n tat ion of th e Ce ntrall y sponsored sc he mes by the states; and
(14) Mod us operandi of the cen tral agenc ies
like cm, ED and so o n .
Th e issues in Cen tre-State re la tions have
bee n under con side ration since the mid 1960s.

In this direction, the following devel op men ts
have taken place:

Administrative Reforms Commission
Th e Ce ntral government appo in ted i.I sixme m ber First Ad min istrative Reform s Co mmi ss ion (ARC) of Indi a in 1966 unde r th e
chairm a nship of Mora rji Desai (fo ll owed by
K Hanumanthayya ). Its terms of refe re nces
in cl uded , a mong oth e rs, the exa mination of
Ce ntre -Sta te relations. In order to exam ine
tho rough ly t he va ri ous issues in Ce ntre-state
relations, th e ARC co nstituted a study tea m
under M.C. Seta lva d. On the ba sis of th e report
of t hi s study tea m, th e ARC fina li sed its own
report and submitted it to the Ce ntra l gove rnme nt in 1969. It ma de 22 reco mm enda tio ns
for imp roving the Ce ntre-state re lat ions. The
important reco mm e ndation s are:
• Esta bli sh ment of an Inter-Sta te Co un cil
und er Article 263 of th e Co nst it ution.
• Appo in tme n t of pe rso n s havi n g long
experience in publi c life a nd ad m inistrat ion and non-partisa n a tti t ud e as
governo rs.
• Del ega tion of powers to the maxim um
extent to the sca tes.
• Tra nsfe rring of more fin a ncial resources
to the states to red uce their depe nd e ncy
upon t he Centre.
• Deployme nt of Ce n tra l armed forces
in the scates either on the ir request or
othenvise.
No actio n was taken by the Ce IHra l government o n th e reco mm e ndations of th e ARC.

Rajamannar Committee
In ]969, t he '111 mil Nadu Government ( DMK)
appointed a three-m em ber co mm ittee unde r
the chairmanshi p of Dr. P. V. Raja ma nnar to
exa min e the e n tire question of Ce n t re-state
re la tio ns and to suggest am en dments to the
Consti tuti on so as to sec ure utm ost a uton omy
to the states. 19 T he com mitt ee submitted its
re port to th e l'Jm il Nadu Government in 1971.
I ~h e other two members or t he comm ittee were Dr.

Laksh manswa my l\'ludaliar a nd P.e. Ch.1 ndra Reddy.

"-____________________________________________________~C~e~n~I~~S~la~l~e~R~e'~a~tia~n~s_~
~" 159
The Committee identified the reasons
for the prevailing unitary trends (tendencies of centralisation) in the country. -They
include: (i) certain provisions in the Constitution which confer special powers on
the Centre; (ii) one-party rule both at the
Centre and in the states; (iii) inadequacy
of states' fiscal resources and consequent
dependence on the Centre for financia l
assistance; and (iv) the institution of Central planning and the role of the Planning
Commission.
The important recommendations of the
committee are as foHows: (i) An Inter-State
Council should be set up immediately,
-eii) Finance-Commission should be made a
permanent body; (iii) Planning Commission
should be disbanded and its place should be
taken by a statutory body; (iv) Articles 356,
357 and 365 (dea ling with President's Ru le)
should be totally omitted; (v) The provision
that the state ministry holds office during
the pleasure of the governor should he omit·
ted; (vi) Certain subjects of the Union List
and the Concurrent List should be trans·
ferred to the State List; (vii) the residuary
powers should be a110cated to the states; and
(viii) AIl·India services (lAS, IPS and IFoS)
should be abolished.
The Central government completely ignored
the recommendations of the Rajamannar
Committee.

Anandpur Sahib Resolution
In 1973, the Aka li Dal adopted a resolu·
tion containing both political and religious
demands in a meeting .held at 'Anandpur
Sahib in Punjab. The resolution, gener·
ally known as Anandpur Sahib Resolution,
demanded that the Centre's jurisdiction
should be restricted only to defence, foreign
affairs, communications, and currency and
the entire residuary powers should be vested
in the states. It stated that the Constitution
should be made federa l in the real sense and
should ensure equal authority and representa·
Ition to all the states at the Centre.

West Bengal Memorandum
In 1977, the West Bengal G~vernment (led by
the Communists) published a memorandum
on Centre-state . relations and sent it to the
Central government. The memorandum inter
alia suggested the following: (i) The word
'union' in the Constitution should be replaced
by the word 'federal'; (ii) The jurisdiction
of the Centre should be confined to defence,
foreign affairs, currency, communications
and economic co·ordination; (iii) Al1 other
subjects including the residuary should be
vested in the states; (iv) Articles 356 and
357 (President's Rule) and 360 (financial
emergency) should be repealed; (v) State's
consent should be made obligatory for forma·
tion of new states or reorganisation ofexist·
jng states; (vi) Of the total revenue raised
by the Centre from all sources, 75 per cent
should be allocated to the states; (vii) Rajya
Sabha shou ld have equal powers with that of
the Lok Sabha; and (viii) There should be
only Central and state services and the All·
India Services should be abolished.
The Central government did not accept the
demands made in the memorandum.

Sarkaria Commission
In 1983, the Central government appointed a
three·member Commission on Centre-state
relations under the chairmanship of KS.
Sarkaria, a retired judge of the Supreme Court.:W
The commission was asked to examine and
review the working of existing arrangements
betw'een the Centre and states in all spheres and
recommend appropriate changes and measures.
It submitted it's report in 1988.
The Commission did not favour struc·
tural changes and regarded the · existing
constitutional arrangements and principles
relating to the institutions basically sound.
But, it emphasised on the need for changes
in the functional or operational aspects. It
observed that federalism is more a functional
lOR Sivaraman and S.R. Sen were hvo other members
of the Commission.

160

,( f Indian Polity

a rrang e ment for co-o perat ive acti o n than
a static in stituti onal con ce pt. It outrig htl y
rejecte d the dema nd for curtai ling the power s
of th e Ce ntre and stated that a stron g Ce nt re
is esse ntial to sa feguar d t he nation a l unity
and in tegri ty which is bei ng threa tened by
th e fi ss iparou s te ndenc ies in the body politi c.
Howeve r, it did not equate strong Cen tre with
centra lisatio n of power s. It observ ed t hat overce ntra li sation IC<l ds to blood pressu re at th e
ce ntre and anae mia at the pe r iphery.
The Co mmi ss ion made 247 recom m e ndations to impro ve Ce n t re-sta te re l~tio n s. The
impor tant recom men dation s are menti on ed
below:
1. A perma nent Inter- State Coun ci l called
the In te r-Gove rnm e n ta l Co un ci l should
be set up under Articl e 263.
2. Articl e 356 ( Pres ide nt 's Rul e) should be
used ve ry sparin g ly, in extre me cases
as a last resort when a ll the ava il abl e
alte rna ti ves fail.
3. The in stitu tio n of All -India Se rvi ces
s hould be furthe r st rengt hened a nd
more of suc h servic es should be crea ted.
4 . The resi duary power s of taxati on should
co ntin ue to remai n with the Parlia ment,
while th e other resi duary powers should
be placed in th e Co nc urren t Li st.
5. Whe n the Presid e nt withh olds hi s/her
asse nt to th e state bills, the reaso n s
should be comm u ni cated to th e state
govern ment.
e Natio na l Deve lop me nt Co un ci l
Th
6.
(NDC) should be re named a nd reco nstitute d as th e Na tional Econo mic a nd
Devel opmen t Co un ci l (NE DC).
7. The zona l co uncil s should be con stitute d
afresh and reacti vated to promo te the
spirit of federa li sm .
8. Th e Ce ntre should have powers to deploy
its a rm ed forces, eve n witho ut th e co nsent of states. However, it is desi rab le
that th e states s ho u ld be co nsul ted.
9. The Ce nt re shoul d co nsult the states
befo re maki ng a law on a subjec t of t he
Concu rre nt Li st.
]0. The procedure of consu lting the chi e f
mini ster in the a ppo in t me nt of the state

gove rno r shou ld be prescr ibed in the
Co nstitu tion itself.
11. The ne t proce eds of t he co rpora tion tax
may be made permi ssibly sharea ble with
the states.
12. The gover nor canno t dism iss the counc il
of mini sters so long as it comm a nds a
maj o rity in th e asse mbly.
13. The gover no r 's term of five years in a
sta te should not be di sturbe d excep t fo r
so me ext re me ly co m pellin g reason s.
14. No co mm iss ion of e nquiry shou ld be
se t up aga inst a sta te minis ter unless a
dema nd is made by the Parlia ment.
15. The surcha rge on in co me tax should not
be lev ied by th e Ce ntre excep t for a specific purpo se an d fo r a stri ctl y limite d
peri od.
16. The presen t division offu nction s between
the Finan ce Comm ission and the
Plann ing Co mmis sio n is rea so nable
and should co ntinu e.
17. Steps shou ld be taken to un iforml y imple-me nt the three langua ge formu la in its
true spirit.
18. No auton omy for rad io and televis ion but
dece ntrali sa tion in th ei r o perations.
19. No cha nge in the role of Raj ya Sabha and
Cen tre's power to reorga nise the states.
20 . The co mm iss ion er for lingui sti c mino rities should be activa ted.
The Centr a l gove rnm e nt ha s imple mente d
180 (out of 247) recom me nd at ions of th e
Sarka ria Co mmi ss ion . The most impor tant is
t he establ i shmen t of the Inter-S tate Counc il
in 1990.

Punchhi Comm ission
The Seco nd comm ission on Ce nt re-Sta te
Re latio ns wa s set-up by the Govern men t of
Indi a in 2007 under the Chair ma nship of
Madan Moha n Punch hi, forme r Chi ef Justic e
21
of India. It was required to look into the
ZIThe other four Membe rs of the Com missio n we re
Dhiren dra Si ngh (Fonner Secreta ry to the Govern ment of India), Vi nod Kumar Duggal (Forme r

Secreta ry to the Govern ment of India), Prof. N.R.

•

Centre-State Relations

issues of Centre-State relations keeping in view
the sea-changes that have taken place in the
poli ty and economy of India since the Sarkaria
Commission had last looked at th e issue of
Centre-State relations over two decades ago.
Th e Comm ission submitted its report to the
government in 2010. In finali sing the 1,456
page report, in seven volumes, the Commission took exte nsive he1p from the Sarkaria
Co mmission report, the Nationa l Commiss ion
to Review th e Working of the Constitution
(NCRWC) report and the Second Administrative Reforms Commission report. However, in
a number of areas, the Commission report
uiffered from the Sarkaria Commission reco mmendations.
After examining at length the issues raised
in its Thrms of Reference and the related
aspects in all their hues and sh ades, the
Com mission cam e to the conclus ion that
'cooperative federalism' will be the key for
sustai ning India's unity, integrity and social
and economic development in future. The
principles of cooperative federalism thus may
have to act as a pra ctical guide for Indi an polity and governance.
Tn all, th e Commission made over 310
recommendations, touching upon several signifi ca nt areas in th e working of Centre-state
relations. The important recom mendations
are mentioned below:
1. 1b facilitate effective implementation of
the laws on List HI subjects, it is n ecessary
that some broad agreement is reached
between the Union and states befo re
introducing legislation in Parliament on
matters in the Co ncurrent List.
2. The Union should be extremely restrained
in asserting Parliamentary supremacy
in matters assigned to the states. Greater
Madhava Menon (Fonner Director, National Judicial
Academy, Bhopal and National Law School of India,
Bangalore) and Dr. Amaresh Bagchi (Emeritus
Professor, National Institute of Public Finance a nd
PoliCY,NewDelhi). With tbepassingawayofDr. Bagchi
in February 2008, Vijay Shanker (Former Director,
Central Bureau of Investigation, Government of
i ndia) was appointed in his place as a Member of the
Commission in October 2008.

~ 161

flexibility to sta tes in relation to subjects
in the State List and "tran sferred items"
in the Con current List is the key for better Centre-state relations.
3. The Union should occupy only that many
of subjects in con current or overlapping
jurisdiction which are absol utely necessary to achi eve uniformity of policy in
demonstrabl e national interest.
4. There shou ld be a co ntinuing auditing
rol e for th e Inter-state Council in the
management of matters in concurrent
or overlapping jurisdi ct ion.
S. The period of six months prescribed in
Article 201 for State Leg islature to act
when the bill is returned by the President
can be made applicable fo r the President
also to decide on assenting or withholding
assent to a state bill reserved for consideration of the President.
6 . Parliament should m ake a law on the
subj ect of Entry 14 of List I (treaty
making and implementing it through
Parlia mentary legislation) to streamlin e
the procedures involved. The exercise of
th e power obviously ca nnot be absolute
or un chartered in view of the federa l
stru cture of legislative a nd executive
powers.
7. Financial obligations and its implications
on state finan ces arising out of treaties
and agreements shou ld be a perman ent term of referen ce to the Fi nance
Com missions constituted from time to
time.
8. While selecting Governors, the Central
Government should adopt the fo llowing
strict gu idelines as recommended in the
Sarkaria Commi ssion report and fon ow
its mandate in letter and spirit:
(i) He/she should be eminent in some
walk of life
(ii) He/ she should be a person from
outside the sta te
( iii) He/ she should be a detach ed figure
and not too intimately co nnected
with the loca l politics of the state
(iv) He/ sh e should be a person who
has not taken too great a part in

162

,(1' Indian Polity

politi cs generally a nd particu la rl y
in th e recent pa st
9. Governors should be given a fixed tenure of five years and their re m ova l
should n ot be at the swee t will of the
Gove rnm e nt at the Centre.
10. Th e procedure laid down for impeachme n t of President, mutatis mutandis can
be made app li ca bl e for impea c hmen t of
Gove rnors as well.
U . Art icle 163 does n ot give the Gove rn or
a ge ne ra l di scret ion ary power to act
again st or witho ut th e ad vice of hi s/ her
Co uncil of Mini sters. In fact, the arca
for the cxercise of di scretion is limited
and even in thi s limited area, hi s/ h e r
choi ce of action should n ot be arbitrary
or fanciful. It must be a choi cc di cta ted
by rcason, activated by good fa ith and
tempered by ca ution.
12. In respect of bills passed by the Legisla tive Assemb ly of a state, the Governo r
sh ould take t h e de c ision within s ix
m onth s whether to grant asse nt o r
to rese rve it for considerat ion of th e
Pres ide nt .
]3 . On th e question of Gove rnor's role in
appointment of Chie f Minister in the
case of an hun g asse mb ly, it is necessary to lay dO\\Tn ce rta in clear guidelin es to be followed as Co nstitutional
co nvention s. These guidelines may be
a s foll ows;
(i) The party or co mbi nation of parties
whi ch co mmands the widest su pport in the Legi sla tive Asscmbl y
should be called upon to form the
Gove rnm ent.
(iir If there is a p re-poll a lliance or
coa lition, it shou ld be treated as one
political party and if such coalition
obtains a majority, the leader of
such coa lition shall be ca lled by the
Governor to form the Governm ent.
(iii) In case no pa rty or pre-poll coa l iti on ha s a clear m ajo rit y, t h e
Gove rn or should se lect the Chi e f
Mini ster in th e order of pre feren ce
indicated he re.

(a) T he group of parties which had
pre-poll alliance comma nding
the largest number
(b) The largest single party staking a cla im to form the gove rnment with the su pport of
others
(c) A post-electoral coal ition with an
partncrs joining the govcmment
(d) A post-electoral alliance with
so me part ies joining the govern me nt and th e remain ing
in cl udin g independ en ts supporting the government from
outside
14. On the question of dismissal of a Chi ef
Mi n is ter, th e Gove rno r should in var ia bl y in s ist on the Chicf Mini ste r proving hi s/ h e r majority o n the fl oo r of
t he Hou se for whi c h h e / sh e s hould
presc ribe a tim e limit.
15. The Governor should have thc right to
san cti on for prosecut ion of a sta te minister against the advice of the Co unc il of
Mini sters, if the Cabi net decision appears
to th e Gove rn or to be motivated by bias
in the face of overwhelming m a tedal.
16. The co nvention of Governors acting as
Chancellors of Univers ities and holding
other statutory positions should be done
away with. His/ her role should be confi ned
to the Constitutional provisions only.
] 7. When a n external aggress ion or inte rn a l
disturbance paral yses the state a dmini stration creati ng a si tuation of a pote nti al
break down of the Constitutiona l machinery of the sta te, all alternati ve courses
ava ilable to the Union for di sc harg ing its
para mount responsibili ty under Article
355 should be exhausted to conta in the
situation and the exe rcise of the power
unde r Article 356 should be Iimi tcd
stri ct ly to rectifying a "fail ure of the
Constitutional machinery in thc s tate~.
18. On the qu estion of invoking Article 356 in
case of failure of Con stitutional machine ry in states, su itabl e a mendmen ts are
required to in corporate the guideli nes
set fort h in t he la ndmark judge mcnl.

Centre-Stale Relations

of the Supreme Court in S.R. Bommai
case zz (1994). This would remove possible misgivings in this regard on the
part of states and help in smoothening
Centre-state relations.
19. Given the strict parameters now set for
invoking the emergency provisions
under Articles 352 and 356 to be used
only as a measure of "last resore, and
the duty of the Union to protect states
under Article 355, it is necessary to provide a Constitutional or legal framework
to deal with situations which require
Central intervention but do not warrant invoking the extreme steps under
ArtiCles 352 and 356. Providing the
framework for ~loca1ised emergency"
would ensure that the state government can contin3e to function and the
Assembly would not have to be dissolved
while providing a mechanism to let the
Central Government respond to the issue
specifically and locally. The imposition
of local emergency is fully justified
under the mandate of Article 355 read
with Entry 2A of List I and Entry 1 of
List n of the Seventh Schedule.
20. Suitable amendments to Article 263 are
required to make the Inter-State Council
a credible, powerful and fair mechanism for management of inter-state and
Centre-state differences.
21. The Zonal Councils should meet at
least twice a year with an agenda proposed by states concerned to maximise
co-ordination and promote harmonisation of policies and action having interstate ramification. The Secretariat of
a strengthened Inter-State Council can
function as the Secretariat of the Zonal
Councils as well.
22. The Empowered Committee of Finance
Ministers of States proved to be a successful experiment in inter-state coordination on fiscal matters. There is
need to institutionalise similar models
in other sectors as well. A forum of Chief
22S.R. Bommai vs. Union of India (1994).

'tt 163

Ministers, Chaired by one of the Chief
Minister by rotation can be similarly
thought about particularly to co-ordinate
policies of sectors like energy, food, education, environment and health.
23. Newall-India services in sectors like
health, education, engineering and judiciary should be created.
24. Factors inhibiting the composition and
functioning of the Second Chamber as a
representative forum of states should be
removed or modified even if it requires
amendment of the Constitutional provisions. In fact, Rajya Sabha offers
immense potential to negotiate acceptable solutions to the friction points
which emerge between Centre and states
in fiscal, legislative and administrative
relations.
25. A balance of power between states inter
se is desirable and this is possible by
equality of representation in the Rajya
Sabha, This requires amendment of the
relevant provisions to give equality of
seats to states in the Rajya Sabha, irrespective of their population size,
26_ The scope of devolution of powers to
local bodies to act as institutions of selfgovernment should be constitutionally
defined through appropriate amendments.
27. All future Central legislations involving
states' involvement should provide for
cost sharing as in the case of the RTE
Act. Existing Central legislations where
the states are entrusted with the responsibility of implementation should be
suitably amended providing for sharing
of costs by the Central Government,
28. The royalty rates on major minerals
should be revised at least every three
years without any delay. States should be
properly compensated for any delay in
the revision of royalty beyond three years.
29. The current ceiling on profession tax
should be completely done away with
by a Constitutional amendment.
30. The scope for raising more revenue from
the taxes mentioned in article 268 should
be examined afresh. This issue may

164

(! Indian Polity

be either referred to the next Fin ance
Co mmi ssion or a n expert com mittee be
a ppointed to look into th e matte r.
31. lb bri ng greater accou n tab il ity, all fi scal leg isla tions shou ld provi de fo r a n
an nual assess men t by a n in de pendent
body a nd th e re po rts of th ese bo dies shou ld be la id in bot h Houses of
Pa rl iame n t/ state leg islature.
32. Co nsiderations spec ified in the Thrms
of Refere n ce (To R) of t h e f in ance
Com mi ss io n s hould be eve n ha nd ed
as between the Ce n tre and the states.
There should be an effective mechan ism
to in vo lve the states in the fina li sation
of the lb R of the f in a nce Co mmi ssio ns.
33 . The Centra l Govern men t shoul d rev iew all
the existing cesses a nd surcha rges with
a view to bri ng ing down their share in
the gross tax reve nue.
34. Beca use of the close lin kages between
the plan and non-p lan expen d iture, a n
expe rt comm ittee may be appoi n ted to
look in to the issue of d istinction between
th e pla n and no n-pl an expe nditu re.
35. There shoul d be mu ch bettercoordi.nation
between the Fin a nce Co mm iss ion a nd
the Pla nning Co m mission. The syn ch ron isatio n of th e periods cove red by th e
Finance Co mmi ss io n and the Five-Year
Plan will cons iderab ly im prove suc h
coordi nat io n.
36 . The Fin ance Co mmi ss io n divis ion in the
Ministry of Fin a nce shou ld be co nverted

into a fu ll-fledged de partme n t, servi ng
as the pe rm a ne n t secretariat for the
Fina nce Commi ssion s.
37. The Plan ni ng Co mmi ssio n has a crucial
ro le in the curren t situatio n. But its
role s hou ld be that of coordination
rat he r tha t of mi cro ma nag in g sectora l
pl a n s of the Ce n tra l m ini stri es and the
sta tes.
38. Steps sho ul d be take n for the setti ng up
of an Inter·Swte Trade a nd Co m merce
Co mmi ss io n u nder Article 307 read with
En try 42 of List-I. Thi s Com m iss ion
shou ld be vested with both adviso ry a nd
execut ive ro les wi th decis ion making
powe rs. As a Co nsti tut io nal body, th e
decisio n s of the Com mission shoul d be
fi na l a nd b in d ing on all states as we ll as
the Un ion of Indi a. Any party aggrieved
with the decis io n of the Comm ission
may prefer a n a ppea l to th e Sup re me
Court.
The recommendat io n s contained in the
Re po rt of the PU ll chh i Commiss io n have
been co nsidered by th e Sta nd ing Com m ittee
of t he In te r-Sta te Cou ncil in its meet in gs
he ld in 20 17 an d 2018. The recom mendatio ns of the Co m m iss io n alo n g with the rec·
omme lld at ion s of the Sta nd in g Co mm ittee
th ereo n , have bee n ci rcu lated to the state
gove rnm e n ts for co mm en ts 23 •
23 Ann ua l Report 202 1-22, Ministry of Home Affa irs,

Govern ment of India, p. 246.

Table 15.1 Articles Related to Centre-State Legislative Relations at a Glance
ArtIcle No

Subject Matter

245.

Extent of laws made by Parliament and by the legislatures of states

246.

Subject-maner of laws made by Parliament and by the legislatures of states

246A.

Special provision with respect to goods and services tax

247.

Power of Parliament to provide for the establishment of certain additional courts

248.

Residuary powers of legislation

249.

Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to a matter In the state list In the national Interest

250.

Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to any matter in the state list if a Proclamation of
Emergency is in operation

Centre-State Relations

~ 165

Inconsistency between laws made by Par1iament under articles 249 and 250 encll~
legislatures of states
252.

Power of Parliament to legislate for two or more states by consent and adoption of such legislation by
any other state

253.

legislation for giving effect to internaUonal agreements

254.

Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made by the legislatures of states

255.

Requirements as to recommendations and previous sanctions to be regarded as matters of prOCedure
only

Table 15.2

Articles Rel ated to Centre-State Administrative Relations at a Glance

Article No

Subject Matter

256.

Obligation of states and the Union

257.

Control of the Union over states in certain cases

257A.

Assistance to states by deployment of armed forces or other forces of the Union (Repealed)

258.

Power of the Union to confer powers, etc., on states In certain cases

258A.

Power of the states to entrust functions to the Union

[ 259.

Armed Forces In states In Part B of the First Schedule (Repealed)

260.

Jurisdiction of the Union in relation to territories outside India

261.

Public acts. records and judicial proceedings

262.

Adjudication of disputes relating to waters of Inter-state rivers or river valleys

263.

Provisions with respect to an Inter-state Council

Table 15.3 Articles Related to Centre-State Financial Relations at a Glance
Article No

Subject Matter

Distribution of Revenues between the Union and the States

,

268.

Duties levied by the Union but collected and appropr~ted by the states

268A.

Service lax levied by the Union and collected and appropriated by the Union and the states (Repealed)

269.

Taxes levied and collected by the Union but assigned to the states

269A.

levy and collection of goods and services tax In course of inter-slate trade or commerce

270.

TaKes levied and distributed between the Union and the states

271.

Surcharge on certain duties and taxes for purposes of the Union

272.

Taxes which are levied and collected by the Union and may be distributed between the Union lind the
states (Repealed)

273.

Grants in lieu of export duty on jute and jute products

[ 274.
275.

Prior recommendation of the President required to bills affecting taxation In which states are Interested
Grants from the Union to certain states

(Contd.)

166

,f!"

Indian Polity

Taxes on professtons, trades, callings and employments

277 .

Savings

278.

Agreement With states in Part B of the First Schedule with regard to certain financial matters
(Repealed)

279.

Ca lculation of "net proceeds~. etc.

279A.

Goods and ServiCes Tax Council

280.

Finance C ommls~ion

281

Recommendations of the Finance Commission
Miscellaneous Fi nancia l Provisions

282,

1:xpenHttiJre defrayable by the Unron or a stat e out of ItS revenues

283.

Custody. etc., of Consolidated Funds, Contingency Funds and moneys credited to the public accounts

284.

Custody of suitors' deposItS and other moneys received by public servants and courts

285.

Exemption of property of the Union from state taxation

286.

Restrictions as t o Imposition of tax on the sale or purchase of goOds

287.

Exemption from taxes on electricity

288.

Exemption from taxation by states In respect of water or electricity in certain cases

289.

Exemption o f property and income of a state from Union taxation

290.

Adjustment In respect of cartalo expenses and pensions

290A.

Annual payment to certain Devaswom Funds

291 .

Privy purse sums of Rulers (Repealed)

I

Borrowing
. .
293.

Borrowing by st ates

0;"

,

,

.



,

CHAP-i1iE R

T

16 Inter-State Relations

he successful functioning of the Indian

federal system depends not only on
the harmonious relations and close
cooperation between the Centre and the states
but also between the states inter se. Hence, the
Constitution makes the following provisions
with regard to jnt e r~state comity:
1. Adjudication of inter-state water disputes.
2 . Coordination through inter-state councils.
3. Mutual recognition of public acts, records
and judicial proceedings.
4. Freedom of inter-state trade, commerce
and intercourse.
In addition, the zonal councils have been
established by the Parliament to promote
inter-state cooperation and coordination. 1

t INTER-STATE WATER DISPUTES
Article 262 of the Constitution provides for

the adjudication of inter·state water disputes.
It makes two provisions:
(i) Parliament may by law provide for the
adjudication of any dispute or com·
plaint with respect to the use, distri·
bution and control of waters of any
inter·state river and river valley.
(ii) Parliament may also provide that neither
the Supreme Court nor any other cou rt
is to exercise jurisdiction in respect of
any such dispute aT complaint.
Under this provision, the Parliament has
enacted two laws (the River Boards Act (I 956)
and the Inter.state River Water Disputes Act
(1956)]. The River Boards Act provides for the
establishment of river boards for the regulation
IStates Reorganisation Act, 1956.

and development of inter·state river and river
valleys. A river board is established by the
Central government on the request of the state
governments concerned to advise them.
The Inter·State River Water Disputes Act
empowers the Central government to set up
an ad hoc tribunal for the adjudication of a
dispute between two or more states in relation
to the waters of an inter·state river or river
valley. The decision of the tribunal would be
final and binding on the parties to the dispute.
Neither the Supreme Court nor any other
court is to have jurisdiction in respect of any
water dispute which may be referred to such
a tribunal under this Act.
So far, the Central governme nt has set up
several inte r·state water dispute tribunals.
The name of the tribunals, the years in which
they were constituted and the states involved
in the dispute are mentioned in Table 16.1.

t INTER-STATE COUNCILS
Article 263 contemplates the establishment
of an Inter-State Council to effect coordination b etween the states and between Centre
and states. Thus, the President can establish
such a council if at any time it appears to
him / her 'that the public interest would be
served b y its establishment. He /she can
define the nature of duties to be performed
by such a council and its organisation and
procedure.
Even though the President is empowered
to define the duties of an inter·state council,

168

,r;J

Indian Polity

Ta ble 16.1 Inter·5tate Water Dispute Tribunals 5et·up 50 Far
51. No.

Name

Set·up In

States Involved

1.

Krishna Water Disputes T~
r ib:.u:n;:a:.'-.,.
' ...._ _.,.;
1969

Maharashtra, Karna taka and Andh ra Pradesh

2.

Godavari Water Disputes Tribunal

1969

Mahar8shtra. Karnatak8, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh and Odisha

3.

Narmada Water Disputes Tribuna!

1969

Rajasthan, Gujarat. Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra

4.

Ravl and Beas Water Disputes Tribunal

1986

Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan

5.

Cauvery Water Disputes Tribunal

1990

Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and puducherry

6.

Krishna Water Disputes Trlbunal·1I

2004

Maharashlra, Kamataka and Andhra Pradesh

7.

Vansadha ra Water Disputes Tribunal

2010

Odisha and Andhra Pradesh

8.

Mahadayl Water DISputes Tribunal

2010

Goa. Kamateka and Maharashtra

9.

Mahanadi Wal er Disputes Tribunal

2018

Odisha and Chhattisgarh

Article 263 specifies th e duties that ca n be
assign ed to it in t he follow in g m a nn er:
(a) enquirin g into and a dvi sing u pon di sputes which may ari se betwee n sta tes;
(b) in vestiga ting an d di scuss in g subjects i n
whi ch the sta tes o r t he Ce n tre a nd the
states have a comm o n in terest; a nd
(c) ma king recom m e nda ti o n s up o n a n y
su ch subject/ a nd pa rti cul a rl y fo r t h e
b e tter co-o rdin ation o f p o l icy a nd
action on it.
"The council 's fun ction to enqui re and advice
upon inter-state di sputes is complem e nta ry to
the Supre me Court's jurisdiction under Articl e
131 to decide a legal controversy between th e
governm en ts. The Coun ci l ca n deal with any
con troversy whethe r lega l o r n o n-lega l, b ut its
fun ction is advisory un li ke that of the co urt
n2
which gives a binding dec ision.
Under th e above provisi on s of Art icle 263,
the Pres iden t h as establi shed th e fo ll owing
counci ls to m a ke recomm e ndatio ns for th e
bette r coordin a ti o n of po licy a nd actio n in
the rela ted subj ects:
• Ce n t ra l Cou nci l of Hea lt h a n d Fa m il y
We lfare .
• Centra l Co un c il of Loca l Gove rnmen e
2M .P' J a in : Indian Constitutional Law, Wadhwa,
Fourth Editio n , p. 382.
3 rt was originally known as the Cen tra l Coun ci l of

Local Self-Government ( 1954).

--i

----

• Fo ur Reg io n a l Co un c il s fo r Sa les lax
fo r the No rt he rn, Ea ste rn , Weste rn a nd
So uthern Zo n es. 4
Establis hment of Inte r-State Council The
Sa rk ar ia Co mmi ss i o n on Centre-Stat e
Re lations ( 1983- 88) made a st rong case for
t he esta bl ishm e n t of a pe rm a n e nt Inter-State
Coun ci l unde r Article 263 ofth e Co nst itut io n .
It reco mm e nded tha t in order to di fferen ti ate th e Inte r-Stat e Cou n c il from o the r bodies esta bli shed und er th e sa m e Art icl e 263 ,
it m ust be cal led as t he In te r-Governm enta l
Counci l. The Co mmissio n recomme nded t hat
th e Coun ci l sh o uld be cha rged wit h the du t ies
la id d own in cl a uses ( b) and (c) of Arti cl e
263 (see above).
In pursuan ce of the above recom me ndations
of th e Sarkaria Commissio n, t he J a nata Dal
Gove rnm en t hea ded by V. P. Sing h establish ed
th e In ter-State Counc il in 1990.5 It con sists of
the fo ll owi n g m e mbers:
(i) Pr im e mini ste r as the Ch a irman
( ii) Ch ief m in iste rs of a ll the sta tes
(iii ) Chi ef ministe rs of uni o n territories havin g leg islat ive asse mbl ies
4The Central Council of Ind ian Med ici ne and t hI:
Ce ntra l Cou ncil of Homoeopathy we re set up under
the Acts of Parlia ment.
5.yhe Inter-State Counci l Order da ted May 28, I99()_

-

Inter-State Relations

(iv) Admi ni strato rs of union territo ries not
havin g legisla tive asse mblie s
(v) Governors of States under Presid ent's rule
(vi) Six Centr al cabin et minis ters, includ ing
the home minis ter, to be nomin ated by
th e Prime Minister.
Five Minis ters of Cabin et rank / Minis ter of
State (indep enden t charge ) nomin ated by the
Chair man of the Council (i.e., Prime Minis ter)
are perma nent invite es to the Council.
Th e coun cil is a recom mend atory body on
issues relatin g to inter-s tate, Centr e-stat e and
Centr e-uni on territo ries relatio ns. It aims
at promo ting coord inatio n betwe en them by
exami ning, discussing and delibe rating on
such issues . Its duties , in detail, are as folloW's:
• invest igatin g and discussing such sub- ·
jects in which the states or the centre
h ave a co mmon intere st;
• makin g recom mend ation s upo n any
such subject for the better coo rdinat ion
of policy and action on it; and
• delibe rating upon such other matte rs of
gen eral in terest to the states as may be
referred to it by the chairm an.
The Cou ncil may meet at least thrice in a
yea r. Its meeti ngs are held in ca mera and all
questi on s a re decide d by con se nsus.
There is also a Sta nding Comm ittee of the
Coun cil. It was set up in 1996 for contin uous
,con sultat ion and processing of matte rs for
th e co nsider ation of the Counc il. It con sists
of th e foll owing m embe rs:
(i) Union Home Minis ter as the Chair man
(ii) Five Union Cabin et Minis ters
(iii) Nine Chief Mini sters
The Counc il is assiste d by a secret ariat
called the Inter-State Counc il Secreta riat. This
secret ariat was set-up in 1991 and is h eaded by
a secret ary to the Gover nmen t of India. Since
2011 , it is also fu n ctioni ng as the secret ariat
of the Zonal Counc i ls.

PUBLIC ACT S, RECORDS AND
JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS
Under th e Const itutio n , th e jurisd iction of
each state is confin ed to its own territory.
Hence , it is possible that the acts and reco rds

~ 169

of one state may not be recogn i sed in anoth er
state. 1b remove any such difficulty, the Co nstituti on co ntain s the "Full Faith and Credit "
clause whi ch lays down the following:
(i) Full faith and credit is to be given
th rough out th e territo ry of India to
public acts, reco rds and judici al proceedings of the Centr e and every state. The
expression 'publi c acts' includes both
legisla tive and execu tive acts of the governm ent. Th e expression 'publi c record '
includ es any officia l book, register or
record made by a public serva nt in the
disch arge of his/ h er official duties.
( ii) The mann er in which and the condit ion s
under which such acts, reco rds and
proce eding s are to be prove d and their
effect determ ined would be as provid ed
by the laws of Parlia ment. This means
that the general ru le m ention ed above
is subjec t to the power of Parlia ment to
lay down the mode of proof as well as
the effect of such acts, record s and proceedi ngs of one state in anoth er state.
(iii) Final judge ments a nd orders of civil
courts in any part of Indi a are capab le
.of execu tion anyw here withi n India
(witho ut th e neces sity of a fresh suit
upon the judge ment) . The rule applie s
only to civil judge m ents a nd not to
crimi n al judge ments . In other words, it
does not requir e the courts of a state to
enforc e the penal laws of anoth er state.

1

INTE R-STATE TRA DE
AND COM MER CE

Articl es 301 to 307 in Part XIII of the Constituti on deal with the trade, co mmerce and
interc ourse within the territo ry of India.
Art icle 301 declar es that trade, comm erce
and interc ourse throug hout the territo ry of
India shall be free. The obj ect of this provision is to brea k down the borde r b arrier s
betwe en th e states and to create one unit with
a view to encou rage the free flow of trade,
co mm erce and interc ourse in the count ry.
The freedo m under this provis io n is not

170 ,~
~~m~d~~~n~fu=n~o/______________________________________________________
confined to inte r-state trade, commerce and
intercourse but a lso extends to intra -state
trade, commerce and intercourse. Thus, Article 301 will be violated whether restrictions
arc imposed at the frontier of any state or at
any prior or subseque nt stage.
T he freedo m gua ra nteed by Article 301 is
a freedo m from all restr ictio ns, except those
which a re provided for in the other provisions
(Articles 302 to 305) of Part XIII of the Co nstitution itself. These are explained be low:
(i) Parliament ca n impose restric tions on
t he freedo.m of trade, com merce and
intercourse between the states or within
a state in public interest. 6 But, the
Parliament can not give preference to
one state ove r anothe r or discriminate
betwee n the states except in t he case of
scarcity of goods in any part of India.
(ii) The leg is latu re of a state ca n impose
reasonab le res tri ctio ns on the freedom
of trade, co mmerce and intercourse
with that stale o r with in that state
in public interest. But, a bill for this
purpo se ca n be introd uced in t he legisla ture on ly wit h th e previo us sanction of the presi dent. Furth er, th e state
legislat u re canno t give prefere n ce to
o ne sta te over a n othe r or disc rimi nate
betwee n the states.
(iii) The legis lature of a state ca n impose
on goods impo rted from other states or
the union territories any tax to wh ich
simi lar goods manufa ctured in t hat state
arc subj ect. This prov ision prohibits the
impositio n of di scri mi natory taxes by
the sta te.
(iv) The freedo m (under Article 301) is subject to the natio nalisation laws ( i. e.,
laws providing for monopoli es in favo ur
6 For exa mpl e, the Parliament has madc the Essential

Commoditi es Act (1955). This Act enables the
Central governmcnt to co nt ro l the production,
sllpply and distribut ion of ce rtain essential commoditi es like petroleum, coa l, iron and stee l and
so on.

of the Ce ntre or t he states). Thus, t he
Parliament or the state legi slatu re ca n
make laws for the carry ing o n by the
respective government of any trade,
bu sin ess, in dustry or serv ice, wh ether
to the exclusion, com plete or partia l, of
citizen s or ot herwise.
. The Pa rl iament can appoint a n a ppropriate authority fo r carryi ng ou t the purposes
of the above provisions relating to the freedom of trade, comme rce a nd intercou rse and
restri ct ions on it. Th e Parliament ca n also
co n fer on that authority the necessary powers
and du ties. But, no such aut hority has been
appoi n ted so far. 7

r ZONAL COUNCILS
The Zonal Cou ncils are t he statutory (a nd
not the consti tutional ) bodi es. T hey are
esta blished by an Act of the Parliament, t hat
is, States Reorganisatio n Act of 1956. T he act
di vided the co untry into fiv e zo n es (Nort hern, Centra l, Eastern, Western and Southern)
a nd provided a zonal cou nc il fo r each zone.
Wh il e fo rmin g these zo n es, seve ra l facto rs have b een taken into acco unt wh ic h
includ e: the natura l divis ions of the country,
the river syste ms and mC<-Ins of co mmuni cation, the cu ltura l and l inguistic affinity and
the requirements of econo mi c deve lo pm e nt,
security a nd law a nd order.
Each zona l co uncil cons ists of the fo ll owing members: (a) home minister of Ce ntral
governmen t. (b) chief mini sters of a ll the
States in t he zo ne. (c) Two other ministers
from each stale in t he zone. (d) Administrator of each unio n territory in the zo ll e.
Besides, the following persons can be associated with th e zo na l cou nci l as advisors ( i.e. ,
without the right to vote in the meetings):
(i) a person nominated by the NITI Aayog;
(ii) chief secreta ry of the govern ment of each
' In USA, sllch authority is known as the ItHcr-5tate
Co mm erce Com mi ssion.

I
________________________________________________________~/n~te~c~S

~w~re~R~e~/o~"~·O~ns~~
~o 171

state in the zone; and (iii) develo pment co m·
missio ner of each state in the zone.
The hom e minis ter of Centr al gover nment
is the co mmon chairm an of the five zo nal
counc ils. Each chief mini ster acts as a vicechairm an of the counc il by rotatio n, holdin g
office for a period of one year at a time.
The zonal cou n ci ls aim at prom oting
coope ration and coord inatio n betwe e n states,
union territo ries and the Centre . They discuss and make reco mmen dation s regard ing
matte rs like econo mic and social plann ing,
lingui stic minor ities, borde r disput es, intcrstate transp ort, and so on . They are only
delibe rative and adviso ry bodie s.
The object ives (or the [uncti ons) of the
zonal counc ils, in detail , are as follows:
• 10 achiev e an emoti onal integr ation of
the count ry.
• 'Ib help in arrest ing the growt h of acute
state-c onscio usness, region alism, linguism and partic ularis tic trends .
• Th help in remov ing the after-e ffects
of separ ation in some cases so that
the proces s of reorga nisati on, integration and econo mic advan cemen t may
synch ronise .

Table 16.2

• 1b enabl e the Centr e and states to cooperate with each other in social and economic matte rs and excha nge ideas and
exper ience in order to evolve unifor m
polici es.
• Th coope rate with each other in the successfu l and speed y execu tion of major
devel opme nt projec ts.
• 'Ib secure some kind of politic al equilibriu m betwe en differ ent region s of the
cou ntry.
Nor t h-Eas te rn Coun cil In addit ion to
the above Zonal Counc ils, a North -Easte rn
Counc il was <;reated by a separ ate Act of
Parli amen t-the North -East ern Coun cil
Act of 1971. 8 Its memb ers includ e Assam ,
Mani pur, Mizo ram, Arun cha l Prade sh,
Naga land, Megh alaya, Tripu ra and Sikkim . 9
Its functi ons are simil ar to those of the
zonal counc ils, but with few additi ons. It
has to formu late a unifie d and coord inated
region al plan cover ing matte rs of comm on
impor tance. It has to review from time to
time the measu res taken by the memb er
states for the maint enanc e of secur ity and
public order in the region .

Zonal CounCils at a Glance

Name
Northern Zonal Council
2. Central Zonal Council

3. Easlern Zonal Council
4. Western Zonal Council
5. Southern Zonal Council

Members

Headquarters

Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab. Rajasthan, Delhi,
Chandlgarh, Jammu and Kashmir and ladakh

New Deihl

Uttar Pradesh. Uttarakhand , ChhaUisgarh. and Madhya
Pradesh

Allahabad

Bihar. Jharkhand. West Bengal and Odisha

Kolkata

Gujarat, Maharastra, Goa and Dadra and Nagar Haveli and
Daman and Diu

Mumbal

Andhra Pradesh. Telangana. Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Kerala
and Puducherry

Chenna i

Sit came ioto ex istence on August 8,1972 .

910 2002, Sikkim was added as the eighth m ember or the North-

Eastern Council.

I

I

I
I

I

I
I
I

172

f?

Indian Polity

Table 16.3

Articles Related to Inter-State Relations at a Glance

A rtIcle No

Subject Matter

Mutual Recognition of Public Acts, etc.

261 .

PubliC acts. records and judtdai ploceedlngs
Disputes Relating to Waters

262.

Adjudtcatlon of disputes relating to waters of Inter-stale rivers or river valleys
Co-ordination between States

263.

Provisions with respect to an inter--state council
Inter·Stete Trade and Commerce

301 .

Freedom of trade, commerce and Intercourse

302.

Power of Parliament to impose restrictions on trade, commerce and intercourse

303.

Restrk:tIons on the leglslattve powers of the Union and of the states wtth regard to trade and commerce

304.

Restrictions on trade, commerce and intercourse among states

30S.

Saving of exlS'llng laws and laws providing for state monopolies

306.

Power of certain states in Part 8 of the First Schedule to impose restrictions on trade and commerce
(Repealed)

307.

Appointment of autnortty for carrying out the purposes of Al1lcles 30110 304

1

Emergency
Provisions

he Emergency provisions are contained in Part XVIII of the Constitution,' from Artic1es 352 to 360. These
provisions enable the Central government to
meet any abnormal situation effectively. The
ratio,naIity behind the incorporation of these
provisions in the Constitution is to safeguard
the sovereignty, unity, integrity and security
of the country. the democratic political system, and the Constitution.
During an Emergency, the Central government becomes an powerful and the states go
into the total control of the Centre. It converts
the federal structure into a unitary one without a formal amendment of the Constitution.
This kind of transformation of the political
system fro~ federal during normal times to
unitary during Emergency is a unique feature
of the Indian Constitution. In this ,c ontext,
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar observed in the Constituent Assembly that):

T

'All federal systems including American
are placed in a tight mould of federalism . No matter what the circumstances,
it cannot change its form and shape.
It can never be unitary. On the other
hand, the Constitution of India can be
both unitary as well as federal according to the requirements of time and
circumstances. In normal times, it is
framed to work as a federal system. But
in times of Emergency, it is so designed
as to make it work as though it was a
uni tary system.'

,Constituent Assembly
'
Debates, Volume VII , p. 34.

The Constitution stipulates three types of
emergencies:
1. An emergency due to war, external aggression or armed rebellion 2 (Article 352).
This is popularly known as 'National
Emergency'. However, the Constitution
employs the expression 'proclamation
of emergency' to denote an emergency
of this type.
.
2. An Emergency due to the failure of the
constitutional machinery in the states
(Article 356). This is popularly known
as 'President's Rule'. It is also known
by two other names-'State Emergency'
or 'constitutional Emergency'. However,
the Constitution does not use the word
'emergency' for this situation.
3. Financial Emergency due to a threat to
the financia l stability or credit of India
(Article 360).

~ NATIONAL EMERGENCY
Grounds of Declaration
Under Article 352, the President can declare
a National Emergency when the security of
India or a part of it is threatened by war or
external aggression or armed rebellion. It
may be noted that the President can declare
a National Emergency even before the actual
occurrence of war or external aggression or
armed rebeHion, if hel she is satisfied that
there is an imminent danger.
~e phrase 'armed rebellion' was inserted by

the 44th Amendment Act of 1978, replacing the
original phrase 'internal disturbance'.

_1-"7,,4"----,(1 Indian Polity
T he P re s id e nt ca l1 also iss ue di ffe re n t
procl amation s o n gro u nds o f wa r, exte r na l
a ggre ss ion , ar m ed rebe llion , or im lllin e n t
d nn ge r the reof, whet her or no t the re is a
p roc lama t io n al rea d y iss ued by him / h er
an d s uch procl a m a t io n is in o pe ra t ion. T h is
provi sio n wa s a dd ed by t he 38th A m cml mcnt
Act of 1975.
When a natio nal e m ergen cy is decla red on
the ground of 'wa r' o r 'external aggress ion ',
it is k nown a s 'Exte rna l Em erge ncy '. O n the
other ha nd, when it is decl a red o n the grou nd
of 'a rm ed rebe lli o n', it is kn own as 'Interna l
Em ergen cy',
A procla ma t ion of Natio nal Emerge ncy may
be ap pli cabl e to the e nti re co u n try o r o nl y il
part of it. Th e 42 nd Am e ndment Act o f 1976
e nabled the Pres ide n t to limi t t he ope rat io n
of a Nat io na l Em ergen cy LO a specified pa r t
of India.
O rig i n a ll y, th e Co n st it u t io n m enti o ned
' in tern al d ist urban ce ' a s th e t hi rd ground for
th e procl am a t io n of a Na t io n a l Emerge n cy,
but th e ex pressio n was too va gu e an d ha d a
wider co nn otati o n . He nce, the 44 t h Ame ndmen t Act of 1978 substituted the words 'arm ed
rebe lli on ' fo r ' in te rnal di st urbance '. T hu s, it
is no longer poss ibl e to decl a re a Nat iona l
Em erge ncy on th e ground of ' in ter na l d ist urbance ' as wa s done in 1975 by th e Co ng ress
gove rnmen t headed by Indira Gandhi .
T he Presi d ent, howeve r, ca n pro c lilil11
a Nat io nal Em e rge ncy onl y a fte r re ce ivin g a wr itte n rec omm e nd atio n fro m th e
ca b in e t 3 . T hi s m ean s th at t he e m e rge n cy
ca n be decla red o nl y on t he co nc ur re nce of
t he cab in et a nd no t m ere ly on th e a dvice of
th e Prim e Mini ste r. In 1975, the th e n Prim e
Min iste r, In di ra Gan d hi ad vised t he Preside nt
to procl aim e m e rge n cy withou t co nsul tin g
he r ca bin e t. T he ca bin et wa s inform ed of
the procl a m a ti o n a fte r it wa s m ad e, <IS a fa it
accomp li. Th e 44th A m e ndm e nt Act of 1978
introdu ced thi s sa feguard to e limin a te any
JArl icl e 35 2 defi nes lhe te r m 'Cabinet' as the counc il
co nsisting of the Prime Min ister and othe r mi n isters
of the OJbi ne t rank.

poss ib ility of thc Pri me Min ister alon e tHk ing
a deci sion in thi s rega rd .
Th e 38 th Amen dm cnt Ac t of 1975 made t he
decla ra tio n of a Na t iona l e me rge ncy immun e
fro m th e j ud icial review. But, thi s provision
was subseq uen tl y de leted by t he 44th Ame ndme nt Act of 1978. Further, in the Mim:rv{/ Mills
case"', ( 1980) , t he Su pre m e Cou rt he ld that
th e procla ma tio n of a n <Hio na l e m e rge ncy
can be cha ll enged in a GOu rt o n the g round
of ma la fide or tha t t he declara tio n waS based
on who ll y ex tra neo uS a nd irre leva nt fac ts or
is a bsurd o r perverse.

Parliamentary Approval and Duration
Th e p rocl a m a ti o n of Em erge n cy mu st be
app roved by both t he Hou ses of Pa rli a m e nt
within o n c mo nth f ro m th e da te of its issue.
Origi na ll y, th e per iod a ll owed fo r a pprova l
by t he PHrii a me n t was two m o n t hs, but wa s
redu ced by th e 44t h Ame ndm ent Act of 1978.
Howeve r, if th e pro cl am <lt ion of e m c rge n cy
is issued a t a t im e whe n th e Lok Sa bha has
bee n di ssol ved o r th e di sso lu t io n of t he Lo k
Sab ha ta kes pla ce du r ing t he pe ri od of o ne
mo n th without a pprov i ng the p rocl a mat io n ,
the n th e procla mation survives u nt il 30 d ays
fro m th e first sittin g of th e Lo k Sabh a afte r
its recon sti tu t io n , p rovided th e Ra j ya Sa bha
ha s in the l11 eanti m e app roved it.
I f a pp roved by bo th the Hou ses of Pa rli a m e n t, t he e m erge ncy co nt inu es fo r s ix
m o nth s, an d ca n be exte nded to <I n indefi n ite
pe ri od with an Hpp roval of t he Pa rliam e nt
fo r every s ix m o nth s. Thi s prov is io n fo r
pe ri odi ca l pa rliame nta ry a pp rova l wa s a lso
added by the 44th Am e ndm e nt Ac t of 1978.
Before that , th e e me rgen cy, on ce a pp roved by
th e Parliam e nt , co uld re mai n in operat ion
a s lo ng as th e Exec uti ve (ca bi ne t) des ire d.
Howeve r, if the di sso lut io n of the Lo k Sa bh a
ta kes pla ce dur i ng (h e pe r io d of six mo nt hs
wi th out approv in g the fu rt her co nt inu<lll ce of
Em erge ncy, th e n th e procl am at io n survivcs
un t il 30 days from th e first s itt in g of t he Lo k
SHb ha a ft e r its reco nsti t ut io n, p rov id ed th e
4 M i llcrU(f Mills vs. UI! ion uf 1m/ iff ( 1980).

Emergency Provision s

Raj ya Sabha has in the m ea n-time appro ved
its co ntinua tion .
Every resolu tion a pprov ing the procl a mation of emerg ency or its contin uance must
b e passed by either House of Parlia ment by
a specia l major ity, that is, (a) a major ity of
the total m embe rship of that house, and (b)
a major ity of not less than two-th irds of the
memb ers of that house presen t and voting .
This specia l major ity provis ion wa s introduced by the 44th Amen dmen t Act of 1978.
Previously, such resolu tion could be passed
by a simpl e major ity of the Parlia ment.

Revo cation of Procl amati on
A procla matio n of emerg e ncy may be revoked
by the Presid ent at a ny t ime by a subseq uent
procla matio n. Such a procla matio n does not
requir e th e pa rliam entary a pproval.
Furthe r, the Presid ent must revoke a proclamat ion if the Lok Sa bha passes a resolu tion
disapp roving its co ntinua tion. Again , this
safegu ard was introd uced by th e 44th Amendment Act of 1978. Before the amen dmen t, a
procla matio n could be revoked by the President on his/ h e r own and the Lok Sabha had
no co ntrol in this regard .
The 44th Amen dmen t Act of 1978 also
provid ed that, where one-te nth of the total
numb er of memb ers of the Lok Sabha give
a writte n notice to the Speak er (or to the
Presid ent if the House is not in sessio n) , a
specia l si tting of the House should be held
within 14 days for the purpose of consid erin g
a resolu tion di sappro ving the contin uation of
the procla matio n.
A resolu tion of disapp roval is differ ent
from a resolu tion appro ving the contin uation of a procla matio n in the follow ing two
respects:
1. The first one is requir ed to b e passed by
the Lok Sabha onl y, whil e the secon d
one needs to be passed by the both
House s of Parlia ment.
2. The first one is to be adopt ed by a simpl e
major ity on ly, while the secon d one
needs to be adopted by a special major ity.

~ 175

Effec ts of Natio nal Emer gency
A procla matio n of Emerg en cy h as drasti c and
wide rangin g effect s on the politic al syste m.
Th ese conse qu ences ca n b e group ed into
three catego ries:
1. Effect o n the Centre- sta te relatio n s,
2 . Effect o n th e life of the Lok Sabha and
State asse mbl y, and
3 . Effect on the Funda menta l Rights.
Effect on the Centr e-Sta te Relati ons While
a procla matio n of Emerg ency is in force, th e
norma l fabric of the Centr e- state relatio ns
under goes a basic change. This ca n be studie d
under three heads, nam ely, execu tive, legisla tive and financ ial.
(a) Execu tive Durin g a Nation al Emerg ency,
the executive power of the Centre extend s to
direct ing any state regard ing the mann er in
which its executive power is to be exe rcised. In
norma l tim es, the Centr e ca n give executive
direct i ons to a state onl y on ce rtain specif ied
matte rs. However, during a Na tional Emergency, th e Centre becom es entitled to give
execu t ive direct ions to a state on 'a ny' matte r.
Thus, the state gover nments are broug ht under
the comp lete contro l of the Centre, thoug h
they are not suspe nded.
(b) Legislative Durin g a Nation al Emergency,
the Parlia ment becom es e mpowered to make
la ws on any subject menti oned in the State
List. Altho u gh th e legisla ti ve power of a sta te
legisla ture is not suspe nded, it becom es subject to the overri ding power ofthe Parlia ment.
Thus, the nonna l distrib ution of the legislative powers betwe en th e Ce ntre and states is
su spend ed, thoug h the State Legisl atures are
not suspe nded. In bri ef, th e Const itutio n beco mes unitar y rather than federa l.
Th e laws made by Pa rliam ent on the
state subjec ts durin g a Natio na l Emerg ency
b eco m e inope rative six mont hs after th e
emerg e n cy has ceased to opera te.
Notabl y, while a procla matio n of n ationa l
emerg ency is in opera tion, the Presid ent can
issue ordin ances on the state subjec ts also, if
the Parlia ment is not in sessio n.

J

I

176

Indion Policy

Furt he r, the Parl iame n t ca n co n fer powe rs a nd im pose du ties upon th e Ce nt re or its
office rs and aut ho riti es in res pect of matte rs
ou(sid e the Un ion List, in orde r to ca rry out
t he laws made by it unde r its exte nded j urisdi ction as a resul t of the procla matio n of a
Nat ional Emerg ency.
The 42 nd Ame ndm e nt Act of J 976 prov ideci
t hat the two conse quenc es me n tioned above
(exec utive a nd legisla ti ve) exte nds 11 0t o nl y to
a sta te where the Eme rge ncy is in o perati o n
but a lso to a ny other state.
(c) Financial While a procla matio n of nation al emerg e ncy is in o peration , the Pres iden t
ca n mod ify the co nsti tution a l distrib ution of
reven ues betwe e n th e cen tre a n d t he states.
This mea n s t ha t th e Pres id e nt ca n e ith e r
redu ce or ca n ce l t he t ra nsfer of fi n a n ces
from Centr e to the states. Such mociificatio n
co ntinu es ti ll the e nd of t he fi na nc ia l yea r in
which the Eme rgency ceases to o perate. Also,
every such order of the Presid e n t has to be laid
be fore both t he House s of Pa rl iamen t.

Effect on the Life of the Lok Sabha and State
Assem bly Whil e a procla matio n of Nat iona l
Emerg e ncy is in o pe ration , the li fe of the Lok
Sab ha may be exte nded beyo nd its n orma l
term (five years) by a law of Parlia me n t for
one year at a t ime (fo r a ny le ngth of tim e).
Howe ve r, t h is exten s io n can n ot con ti nu e
beyo nd a pe riod of six mon ths after the e me rge ncy has ceased to ope ra te. Fo r exa mpl e, the
te rm of th e f jfth Lok Sab ha (1971- 1977) was
exte nded two t im es by o ne year at a ti meS.
Simil a rl y, th e Pa rliame nt may exten d the
norma l tenure of a state legis lat ive asse mbl y
s.rhe term of the Fifth Lo k Sa bha whi ch was to
exp ire 011 18 March , 1976 was extend ed by onc year
upto 18 March , 1977 by th e I-louse of t he People
(Ex tens io n of Durati on ) Act, 1976. It was extend for
a funhe r peri od of one year upto 18 March , 1978 by
the House of the I'eo ple (Exten sion of Durat ion)
Amend ment Act, 1976. However, t he I-louse was

dissolved on 18 Januar y, 1977, " fter hav ing bee n in

existen ce for a period of five years, ten month s a nd
six days.

(five years) by one )'ear each time (for a ny
le ngth of tim e) dur ing a nat iona l e merge ncy,
su bject to a max im um period of six month s
after t he Eme rge ncy has ceased to operat e.
Effect on the Funda menta l Rights Articl es
358 a nd 359 descr ibe the effec t of a Nat io nal
Em e rgenc y on t h e Fu n da menta l Rig h ts.
Art icl e 358 dea ls with the suspe nsion of th e
Funda menta l Rights gua ra nteed by Art icle ] 9,
whil e Articl e 359 dea ls with t he slispe nsion
of oth er Fund a menta l Rights (exce pt those
gua'ra n teed by Articl es 20 and 21). These two
p rov isio ns are expl ai n ed be low:
(a) Suspe nsion of Funda menta l Rights under
Articl e 19 Acco rdin g to Artic le 358, whe n a
procla ma ti on of na tion a l e merge ncy is ma de,
t he six Funda men ta l Rights u nde r Articl e 19
a re a uto mat ica ll y sllspe nd ed . No se para te
o rder fo r their suspe nsio n is requir ed.
Whil e a procla ma ti o n of nat io na l e mer·
ge ney is in o perati on, t he state is freed fro m
t he restr iction s i mpose d by Articl e 19. I n
o t he r wo rd s, th e state ca n make any law
or ca n take any exec utive actio n a br idgi ng
or tak ing away the six Funda me nta l Rights
guara n teed by Artic le 19 . Any suc h law or
exec utive actio n ca n not be challe nged on the
groun d tha t they are inco ns iste n t with the six
Fun da me n ta l Rig hts guara nteed by Articl e 19.
When t h e Natio na l Eme rgenc y cease s to
o perate , Art icle 19 a uto matic all y revive s
a nd co mes i nto fo rce. Any law ma de du r ing
Em ergenc y, to the ext ent of inco ns iste ncy
with Articl e 19, ceases to have effect. However,
no remed y lies for any th ing done dur ing the
Emerg e ncy even after the Emerg en cy ex pi res.
Th is mea ns t hat t he legisla tive an d execu t ive
act ions taken duri n g the e merge ncy ca nnot be cha ll e nged even afte r th e Emerg e ncy
ceases to o perate .
The 44th Amen dme nt Act of 1978 restric ted
t he sco pe of Articl e 358 in two ways. Firstly,
the six Fu nda menta l Righ ts un der Articl e 19
stands suspe n ded o nl y when the Na tion a l
Emerg ency is declar ed o n the gro und of war
or extern a l aggres sio n and not on t he groun d
of ar me d rebe lli o n . Seco nd ly, o nl y th ose

Emergency Provisions

laws whi ch are relate d with the Emerg ency
are protec ted from being challe nged and not
other laws. Also, the execu tive action taken
only under such a law is protec ted.
(b) Suspension of other Fundamental Rights
Articl e 359 autho rises the presid ent to suspend the right to move any court for the
enfor cemen t of Funda menta l Rights durin g a
Natio nal Emerg ency. This mean s that under
Articl e 359, the Funda menta l Rights as such
are not suspe nded, but on ly their enforc ement. The sa id rights are theore tically alive
but the right to seek remed y is suspe nded.
The suspe nsion of enfo rcem ent relate s to
only those Funda menta l Rights that are specified in the Presid ential Order. Furthe r, the
suspe nsion could be for the period durin g
the opera tion of emerg ency or for a shorte r
period as m ention ed in the order, and the
suspe nsion order may exten d to the whole
or any part of the count ry. It shoul d be laid
before each House of Parlia ment for approval.
While a Presid ential Order is in force,
the State can make any law or can take any
executive action abridg ing or taking away the
specif ied Funda menta l Rights. Any such law
or executive action ca nnot be challe nged on
the groun d that they are incon sisten t with
the specif ied Funda menta l Rights. When the
Order ceases to opera te, any law so made, to
the exten t of incon siste ncy with the specif ied
Funda men·t al Rights, ceases to have effe ct. But
no rem edy lies for anyth ing done durin g the
opera tion of the order even after the order
ceases to opera te. This m eans that the legislative and execu tive action s taken durin g the
opera tion of the Order ca nnot be chall enged
even after the Order expire s.
The 44th Amen dmen t Act of 1978 restric ted
the scope of Articl e 359 in two ways. Firstly,
th e Presid ent ca nnot suspe nd the right to
m ove the Court for the enforc ement of fundamenta l rights guara nteed by Articl es 20 and
21. In other words, the right to protec tion in
respec t of co nvi ction for offenc es (Artic le 20)
and the right to life and perso nal libert y
(Artic le 21) remai n enforc eable even durin g
emerg ency. Secondly, only those Jaws which

~ 1n

are relate d with th e emerg ency are protec ted
from being challe nged and not other laws and
the execu tive ·actio n taken only under such a
law, is protec ted.

Distin ction Betw een Articles 358 and 359
The differ ences betwe en Articl es 358 and 359
ca n be summ arised as follows:
1. Articl e 358 is confin ed to Funda menta l
Rights under Articl e 19 onl y where as
Artic le 359 exten d s to all thos e
Funda menta l Rights whose enforc ement
is suspe nded by the Presid ential Order.
2. Articl e 358 autom atical ly suspe nds the
funda menta l rights und er Articl e 19 as
soon as the emerg ency is declar ed. On
the other hand, Articl e 359 does not
au·t omati cally suspe nd any Funda menta l
Right. It only empowers the presi dent to
suspe nd the enfor cemen t of the specified Funda menta l Rights .
3. Articl e 358 opera tes only in case of
Extern al Emergency (that is, when the
em ergen cy is declared on the grounds of
war or extern al aggression) and not in the
case of Intern al Emergency (ie, when the
Emergency is declared on the groun d of
armed rebellion). Article 359, on the other
hand, operat es in case of both Extern al
Emergency as well as Intern al Emergency.
4. Article 358 suspen ds Funda menta l Rights
under Articl e 19 for the entire durati on
ofEmerg ency while Article 359 suspen ds
the enfor cemen t of Funda menta l Rights
for a period specif ied by the presid ent
which may either be the entire durati on
of Emerg ency or a shorte r period.
5. Articl e 358 extend s to the entire count ry
wh ereas Articl e 359 may extend to the
entire count ry or a part of it.
6. Articl e 358 suspe nds Articl e 19 compl ete ly while Artic le 359 does not
empo wer the suspe nsion of the enforcement of Articl es 20 and 21.
7. Article 358 enable s the State to make any
law or take any executive action inconsisten t with Funda menta l Rights under
Articl e 19 while Articl e 359 enabl es

178

P

Indian Polity

the Stil te to make Lln y la w or take a ny
executi ve ar.tion in co nsiste nt with those
Funclamc n tal Rights wh ose en forcem ent
is suspended by the Presidcntial Order.
Th e re is a lso a s imilar ity between Arti cle
358 and Art icle 359. Bot h p rovide imm u ni ty
frol11 ch all e ngc to o nl y th ose laws whi ch arc
re lat ed with t he Em e rgen cy and not othe r
la ws . Also, th e exec ut ive a ct ion take n onl y
u nde r such c'l law is protected by both.

Declarations Made So Far
Thi s ty pe o f Emerge ncy ha s been procla im ed
three tim es so far-in 1962, 197 1 <l nci I975.
Th e first proclama tion of Nationa l Eme rgen cy was issued in Oc tober ] 962 on acco u nt
of Chinese aggress ion in the NEFA (North-East
Fro nt ier Age ncy -now Aruna cha l Pradesh) ,
and wa s in force till J anuary 1968. He nce,
a fresh procla ma tion was not needed at the
time of Wilr again st Paki sta n in 1965.
The seco nd proclamation o f national eme rge ncy wa s made in Decembe r 197] in th e
wake of attilck by Pak istan. Even when thi s
Emergency was in o pe ration , a third proclama tion of Nat ional Emergency wa s made in
Jun e 1975. Both the seco nd an d th ird proclamations we re revo ked in i\'l arch 1977.
The first two proclama t ions (1962 a nd
197 1) were made o n the grou nd of 'external
agg ress ion' , wh il e th e th ird procla mation
(1975) was made on the gro und of 'i n ternal
di sturban ce ', that is, ce rtain persons ha ve
been incitin g th e po lice a nd the armed forces
aga inst the di scharge of the ir du ties and their
normal fu nction ing.
The Em erge ncy declared in 1975 ( internal
emergen cy) proved to be the most co n trovers ial. The re was widesprea d critici sm of (h e
m isuse of Emerge ncy powers. In the election s held to the Lok Sabha in 1977 after the
Emergency, the Congress Party led by In d ira
Gandh i lost a nd the ,Ja l1ta Party came to
power. This govern m ent appointed the Shah
Comm ission to investigate the circulllsta nces
tha t wa rranted th e dechlration of an Emergency in 1975. The co mmission did not justify the declarat ion of the Em ergency. Hen ce,

th e 44 th Amendm e nt I\ct wa s ena ctcd in 1978
to introdu ce a number of safeguards aga inst
the m isuse of Em erge ncy provisions.

~ PRESIDENT'S RULE
Grounds of Imposition
Articl e 355 imposes a duty on the Centre to
protect eve ry state agai nst externa l aggression
and internal di sturbance and to en su re tha t
th e govern me nt orevery state is ca rr ied o n in
acco rd a nce with the prov isio ns ofthe Co nst itution. It is th is duty in th e performance of
wh ich the Centre takes over the govern ment
of t.I state un de r Artic le 356 in case of fail ure
of constitutional mac hin ery in state. Thi s is
popu la rl y known as ' Pres id en t's Ru le'. It is
al so known as 'Slate Eme rge ncy' or 'Constitu tion a l Emergen cy'.
Th e Pres ident's Ru le can be procla im ed
und erArticl e3560n two gro unds -one mentioned in Articl e 356 itself and another in
Art icle 365:
1. Art icl e 356 e mpowers the Preside nt to
iss ue a proclamation, if hel she is sat isfied that a sittl qtio n has arise n in whi ch
the gove rnm ent of a state ca nll o t be
carried on in accordance wit h the provisio ns of the Constitution . Notabl y, th e
Pres id ent can act either on a report of
th e gove rn or of the state or otherwise too
( ie, even without the governor's report).
2. Art icle 365 says that whenever a stale
fail s to compl y with or to give effect to
any direction fro m the Centre, it will
be lawfu l for th e President to hold that
a situat ion has ari sen in whi ch the govern me n t of the state can not be ca r ri ed
on in accordan ce with the provis io ns of
the Constit ut ion .

Parliamentary Approval and Duration
A procla mation impos in g Presiden t's Rul e
mu st be approved by both the Houses o f Parlia me nt within twO mon ths from th e date
of its iss ue. However, if the procla mation of
Pres ident's Ru le is iss ued at a time when the

Emergency Provisions

Lok Sahha has been dissolved or the dissolu~
tion of the Lok Sabha takes pl ace during the
period of two months without approving the
proclamation, then the proclamation survives
until 30 days from the first sitting of the Lok
Sabha after its reconstitution, provided the
Rajya Sabha approves it in the mean time.
If approved by both the Hou ses of Parlia~
ment, the President's Rule continues for six
months6 . It can be extended for a maximum
period of three years1 with the approval of
the Parliament, every six months. However,
if the dissolution of the Lok Sab ha takes
pla ce during the period of six months with~
out approving the further continuation of
the President's Rule, then the proclamation
survi ves until 30 days from the first sitting
of the Lok Sabha after its reconstitution, provided the Rajya Sabha ha s in the meantime
approved its continuance.
Every resolution approving the proc1amation
of President's Rule or its continuation can be
passed by either House of Parliament only by
a simple majority, that is, a majority of the
members of that Hou se present and voting.
The 44th Amendment Act of 1978 introduced a new provision to put restraint on the
power of Parliament to extend a proclamation
of President' s Rule beyond one year. Thus,
it provided that, beyond one year, the President's Rule can be extended by six months at
a time only when the fo ll owing two conditions are fulfilled:
1. A proclamation of National Emergency
should be in operation in the whole of
India, or in the whole or any part of the
state; and
2. The Election Commission must certify
that the general elections to the legislative
fi-rhe 42nd Amendment Act of 1976 had raised
the period of six months to one year. Thus, once
approved by both the Houses of Parliament, the
proclamation of President's Rule could continue
for one year. But, the 44th Amendment Act of 1978
again reduced the period to six months.
7The President's Rule imposed in May, 1987 in
Punjab was allowed to continue for five years under
the 68th Amendment Act of 1991.

~ 179

assembly ohh e co ncerned st.1.te cannot be
held on account of diffi culties.
A proclamation of President's Rul e may be
revoked by the President at any time by a subsequent proclamation. Such a procla mation
does not require the parliamentary approval.

Consequences of President's Rule
The President acquires the following extraor·
dinary powers when the President's Rule is
imposed in it state:
1. l-Ie / she can take up the fu nctio n s of the
sta te government and powers vested
in the governor or any other executive
authority in the state.
2. He/ sh e ca n declare that the powers of the
state legislature are to be exercised by
the Parliament.
3. He/ she can take all other necessary steps
incl uding the suspension of the constitutional provisions relating to any body
or authority in the state.
Therefore, when the Presi dent's Rule is
imposed in a state, the President dismisses the
state co uncil of ministers headed by the chief
minister. The state governor, on behalf of the
Presi dent, carries on the sta te administration
with the help of the chief secretary of the state
or the advisors appointed by the President.
This is the reason why a proclamation under
Article 356 is popular1 y known as the imposition of 'President's Rule' in a state. Further, the
President either suspends or dissolves the state
legislative assembly8. The Parliament passes
the state legislative bills and the state budget.
When the sta te legislature is thus sus·
pended or dissolved:
L The Parliament can delegate the power to
make laws for the state to the President
or to any other authority specified by
him / her in this regard,
2. The Parliament or in case of delegation,
the President or any other specified
authority can make laws co nferring powers and imposing duties on the Centre or
its officers and authorities, and
8 1n case of dissolution, fresh elections are held for

constituting a new legislative assembly in the state.

180

,(J Indian Polity

3. The President G in auth orise, wh en th e
Lok Sa bh a is not in sess ion, expenditure
fro m th e state co nsolidated fund pen d·
ing its san ctio n by th e Pa rli a me nt.
A law made by th e Parliament or th e Pres ident or a ny other specified author ity co nt inues to be o perat ive eve n afte r the Presi de nt 's
Rul e. This means tha t th e peri od for wh ich
such a law rema ins in fo rce is n ot coterminou s with th e durat io n of the procla mati o n.
But it ca n be re pealed or a ltered or re-enacted
by th e state leg islature.

It sh ould be noted here that the Pres ide nt
ca nnot assum e to himse lf th e powers vested
in th e con ce rn ed state high court o r susp end
the provis io ns of th e Co nst itut io n relat in g to
it. In other words, the constituti o nal pos ition ,
status, powers a nd fun ctions of the conce rned
state high court rema in th e same eve n during
th e Pres ident 's Ru le.
A compariso n of the National Emergen cy and
the President's Rule ( in terms of the grounds,
parliamen tary approva l, duration, revoca ti on
a nd consequ ences) is given in Thble 17. 1.

Table 17.1 Comparing National Emergency and President's Rule
National Emergency (Article 352)

Presldenfs Rule (Article 356)

1. It can be proclaimed only when the security of India
or a part of It Is threatened by war, external aggression or armed rebellion.

1. It can be proclaimed when the government of a state
cannot be ca rried on in accordance with the provl·
sions of the Constitution due to reasons which may
not have any connection with war, external aggression or armed rebellion.

2. During its operation, the state executive and legis-

2. During its operation, the state executive Is dismissed
and the state legislature Is either suspended or dIssorved. The president administers the state through
the governor and the Parliament makes laws for the
state. In bltef, the executive and legtslettve powers of
the state are assumed by the Centre.

lature continue to functfon and exercise the powers
assigned to them under the Constitution. Its effect Is
that the Centre gets concurrent powers of administration and legislation In the state.

3. Under this, the Parliament ca n make laws on th e
subjects enumerated in the State list only by itself,
that is, it cannot delegate the same to any other body
or authority.

4. There is no maximum period prescribed for Its operation. It can be continued Indefinitely with the approval
of Parliament for every six months.

3. Under this. the Parliament can delegate the power
to make laws for the stal e to the President or to any
other authority specified by him/her. $0 far, the practice
has been for the president to make laws for the state
In consultation with the members of Parliament from
that state. Such laws are known as President's Acts.

4. There Is a maximum period prescribed for tts operetion, that is, three years. Thereafter. It must come to
an end and the normal constitutional machinery must
be restored In the state.

5. Under this, the relationship of the Centre with all the
states undergoes a modlflcation.

5. Under this, the relationship of only the state under
emergency with the Centre undergoes a modifi cation.

6. Every resolution of Parliament apprO\!lng its proclamation or Its continuance must be passed by a special
maJority.

6. Every resolution of Parliament approving ItS pradamatlon or Its continuance can be passed omy by a
simple maJority.

7. It affects fundamental rights of the citizens.

7. It has no effect on Fundamental Rights of the citizens.

B. lok Sabha can pass a resolution for Its revocation.

8. There Is no such provision. It can be revoked by the
President only on his/her own.

--

Emergency Provisions

Use of Artic le 356

-

Since 1950, the Presid ent's Rule ha s b ee n
imposed on more than 125 occasi ons. Furthe r,
on a numb er of occasi ons, the Presid ent's Rule
has been imposed in an arbitr ary mann er for
political or person al reason s. Hen ce, Article 356
has b ecome onc of the most contro versia l and
most criticised provis ion of the COnstitution .
For the first tim e, the Presid ent's Rule was
imposed in Punj ab in 1951. By now, all most
all the states have bee n broug ht under the
Presid ent's Rule, o nce or twice or more.
When gen eral electio n s were held to the Lok
Sabha in 1977 after the intern al emerg en cy, the
ruling Co ngress Pa rty lost and the Janata Party
ca me to power. The new govern me nt heade d by
Morar ji Desa i impos ed Presid ent's Rule in nin e
states9 (wher e the Congress Party was in power )
on the groun d that the assem blies in those
states no longe r repres ented the wishe s of the
electo rate. When the Congress Party return ed.to
power in 1980, it did the sa me in nine states iO
on the same groun d.
In 1992, Presid ent's Rul e was impos ed
in three BJP-ru led states (Madh ya Prade sh,
Hima chal Prade sh and Rajas than) by the
Congress Party o n the groun d that they were
n ot impl emen ting sincer ely the ban impos ed
by the Centre on reli gious organ isatio ns. In
a landm ark judge ment in the Bomm ai case ll
( 1994), the Supre me Court uph e ld the validity of this procla matio n on the groun d that
secula ri sm is a 'basic featur e' of the Con stitution. But, the court did not uphol d th e va lidity of the impOSition of the Presi dent 's Rule
in Naga land in 1988, Karna taka in 1989 and
Megh alaya in 1991.
Dr. B.R Ambedkar, while replyi ng to the critics of this provis ion in the Const ituent Assembl y, hoped that the drastic powe r confer red by
~hose nine States include Rajaslhan, Uttar Pradesh,

Madhya Prades h, Punjab, Bihar, Himac hal Pradesh,
Orissa, West Bengal and Haryana.
I~hos e nine states includ e Utta r Prades h, Bihar,
Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Orissa,
Gujarat, Maharashtra a nd Thmil Nadu.
II S.R. Bomma i vs. Union of India (1994).

~ 181

Arti cle 356 would remai n a 'dead-letter' a nd
would be used only as a measu re of last resort.
He observ ed l 2 :
~Th e interv ention of the Centre mu st be

dee med to be barred, becau se that would
be an invasi on on the sovere ign a uthority of the provin ce (state ). That is a
funda menta l pro positi on which we must
accep t by reason of the fact that we have
a Fede ra l Const itutio n . That bei ng so, if
the Cen tre is to inte rfe re in the admin istration of provi ncia l affairs , it must be
under som e obliga tion wh ich the Co nstituti on impos es upon the Ce ntre. The
prope r thing we ought to expec t is that
such Articl es will never be ca lled into
opera tion a nd that they would remai n
a dead-l etter. If at all th ey a re broug ht
into opera tion , I h ope the Pres iden t
who is e ndowed with this powe r will
take prope r preca ut ions before actua lly
suspe nding th e admin istrati on of the
provin ce."
Howeve r, the subseq uent events show that
what was h oped to be a 'dead- letter' of the
Consti tution has turned to be a 'deadly-wea pon '
aga inst a number of state gover nment s a nd
legisla tive assem blies. In this co ntext, H .V.
Kama th, a memb er of the Const ituent Assem bly comm ented: 'Dr. Ambe dkar is dead and the
Articl es are very much a live'.

Scope of Judic ial Revie w
The 38th Amen dmen t Act of 1975 made the
sa tisfact ion of the Presid ent in invok ing Article 356 final a nd concl u sive which could not
be challe nged in any court o n any groun d.
But, this provis io n was subse qu ently delete d
by the 44th Amen dmen t Act of 1978 impl ying
that the satisfa ction of the Presid ent is not
beyon d judic ia l rev iew.
In the Bomm ai case ( 1994) , the follow ing
propo s iti o n s have bee n laid down by th e
12Cotls tiruent Assemb ly Debates, Volume IX, pp. 133

and 177.

Sup re me Court o n impositio n of Preside nt 's
Ru le in a state under Arti cle 356:
1. The presidential procla matio n imposing
Preside n t's Rul e is subject to j ud icia l
rev iew.
2. The satisfactio n of the President m ust be
based on relevant ma teria l. The act io n
of the pres ide nt ca n be struck down by
the cou rt if it is based on irrelevant or
ex traneous grounds or if it was fou nd to
be ma lafid e or perve rse.
3. Burden li es on th e Cen tre to p rove that
releva n t mate ri al exist to j u stify the
imposit io n of th e Pres ide n t's Ru le.
4. Th e court cann ot go in to the co rrectn ess
of the mater ial or its adequacy bu t it ca n
see whether it is releva n t to the action .
5. If the co u rt holds the p res ide n tial procla ma ti o n to be unco n sti tut iona l and
in va lid, it has powe r to restore the
d ismissed sta te govern me n t an d rev ive
the state leg isla ti ve asse mbly if it was
susp ended or disso lved.
6 . The state leg islat ive asse mbly shou ld be
disso lved o nl y afte r the Pa rli a ment has
approved the p resi dent ia l procla mati on.
Until such app roval is give n , the p reside nt ca n onl y suspe nd the asse mb ly. In
case th e Pa rliam ent fa ils to a pp rove the
p roclama tion, the asse mbl y woul d get
react ivated.
7. Secularism is one of the 'basic featu res' of
the Const ituti on. I-Ie nce, a state gove rn men t pu rsu ing an t i-sec ular politics is
lia ble to action u nde r Article 356_
8. The quest io n of the sta te governm en t
los ing the co nfi de nce of the legis lative
assemb ly sh ould be deci ded o n the fl oor
of th e House an d u n til that is don e the
min istry shou ld not be un sea ted.
9. Wh ere a n ew po lit ica l party assum es
power at the Centre, it will not have the
a uthority to di smi ss min istr ies formed
by ot her parties in th e sta tes_
10. The power un de r Article 356 is an exceptio na l powe r a n d sh ould be used only
occass io na ll y to m ee t the requi re m ents
of spec ial situations.

Cases of Proper and Improper Use
Based on the report of th e Sa rkaria Com mission
on Cen tre-state Relations (1988), the Supreme
Cou rt in Bommai case (1994) enlisted the situations where the exercise of power under Article
356 cou ld be proper or im properl3.
Imposit io n of Preside n t's Ru le in a state
would be proper in the foll ow in g situatio ns:
1. Where afte r genera l elect io ns to th e
asse mb ly, no party secures a majo ri ty,
tha t is, ' Hu ng Asse mb ly'.
2. Where the party havi ng a majo rity in
the assembly decli nes to for m a ministry
an d the governo r ca nn ot find a coa lition
ministry comm anding a majo rity in the
assembly.
3 . \-\The re a m inistry resigns after its defeat
in th e asse mbl y a nd no other pa rty is
will in g or able to for m a m inistry co mma n d in g a majori ty in the asse mbly.
4. Wh ere a co nstitutio nal d irectio n of the
Ce ntral gove rn me n t is di srega rd ed by
the sta te gove rn me nt.
5. Interna l subversion where, fo r example,
a gove rnm e nt is de lib era te ly act in g
aga inst the Co nstitu ti on a nd th e law or
is fome n ting a viole n t revolt.
6. Physica l breakdown where the governm en t wi lfully refuses to d isch a rge its
constitu tiona l obl igat ions endangering
the secur ity of the state.
The impositi o n of Pres iden t's Rul e in a
s~ate ~vo ul d be imprope r und er th e fo ll owi ng
sltuatlO ns:
1. Where a mini stry res igns or is d ismissed
on los ing m ajority su pport in th e
asse mbly a nd the gove rno r reco m mends
impOSition of Pres iden t's Ru le without
probin g th e poss ibility of fo rm ing an
alterna tive m inistry.
2. Whe re the govern or makes hi s/ h e r own
assess me nt of the suppo rt of a m inistry in the asse mbl y a nd recommends
impos itio n of Presi den t's Ru le witho ut
13Report of lite Commission 011 CClHn~-Slate RelatiOlIS
Pan I, pp. 165- 180 ( 1988).
,

Emergency Provisions

allowi ng the minis try to prove its major ity on the fl oo r of the Assembly.
3. Where the ruling party enjoyi ng majori ty
suppo rt in the assem bly has suffe red a
massive defeat in the genera l electio ns to
the Lok Sabha such as in 1977 and 1980.
4. Intern al disturbances not amou nting to
intern al subversion or physical breakdown .
5. Malad minis tration in the state or allega tions of co rrupti on aga inst the ministryor strin ge nt financ ial exigen cies of
the state.
6. Where the state govern m ent is not given
prior warni ng to rectify itself excep t
in case of extrem e urgen cy lea ding to
disastrous con sequ en ces.
Where the pmver is used to sort ou.t intraparty p robl em s of the ruling party, or
for a purpo se extra neous or irreleva nt to
the one for which it has bee n confe rred
by the Con stituti on .

I

, t--....,

t - ,:>!ANCIAL EMERGENCY
Grounds of Decla ration
Articl e 360 empowers the Presid ent to proclaim ' a Finan cial Emerg ency if hel she is
satisfi ed that a situat ion h as ari se n due to
which th e financ ial stabili ty or credit of Indi a
or any part of its territo ry is threat en ed .
The 38th Amen dmen t Act of 1975 made
the satisfa ction of the Presid ent in declar ing
a Finan cial Emerg ency fi nal a nd co nclusive
and not questi onabl e in any court on any
groun d. But, this proviSion was subseq uentl y
delete d by th e 44th Amen dmen t Act of 1978
imply ing th at the satisfactio n of the Presid ent
is not beyo nd judici al review.

Parliamentary Approval and Duration
A procla matio n dec1a ring financ ial emergency must be a pproved by both th e Houses
of Parlia ment within two month s from the
date of its issue. However. if the procla matio n
of Finan cial Em ergenc y is issued at a time
wh en the Lok Sabha has been dissolved or the

~ 183

dissol ution of the 10k Sabha takes place during
the period of two month s witho ut approv ing
the procla matio n , then the procla matio n survives unti l 30 days from the first sitting of the
10k Sabha after its recons titutio n , provid ed the
Rajya Sabha has in the m eantim e appro ved it.
Once appro ved by both the House s of Parli ame nt, the Finan cial Emerg ency contin u es
indefi nitely till it is revoked. This impli es two
things :
1. there is no m ax imum period prescribed
for its opera tion j and
2 . repea ted par1iamenta~y a pproval is not
requir ed for its contin uation .
A resolution approving the procla matio n of
financ ial emerg ency. can b e passed by either
House of Parlia ment on ly by a simpl e major ity. 'th at is, a major ity of the m embe rs of that
house presen t and voting .
A procla matio n of Finan cial Emerg ency
may be revoked by the presid ent at anytim e
by a subseq uent procla matio n. Such a procla matio n does not requir e the parlia menta ry
appro vaL

Effects of Finan cial Emergency
The conse quenc es of the procla m ation of a
Finan cial Emerg ency are as follows:
1. Th e execu tive autho rity of the Centre
extend s to the giving of (a) direct ions to
any state to observe the canon s of financial propri etYj and (b) such other directions to any state as the Presid ent may
deem necessary,
2. Any such direct ion may includ e a provisio n requir i ng (a) the reduc tion of salaries and a110wa n ces of all or any class of
perso ns servin g in the sta tej and (b) the
reserv ation of all mon ey bills or other
financ ial bills for the con sidera tio n of
the Presid ent after they are passed by
the legisla ture of the state.
3 . The Presid ent may issue direct ions for the
reduc tion of salari es and allow ances of
(a) all or any class of perso ns servin g
the Union ; and (b) the judge s of the
Supre me Court and the high court.

184

,g!

Indian Polity

Thus, durin g the operation of a financial
emergency, the Ce ntre acq uires full co ntrol
over th e sta tes in financial matters. H.N. Kun·
zru, a member of the Co nstituen t Asse mbl y,
stated that the fina ncia l e mergency provi·
sion s pose a serious threat to the financia l
a uton o my of the states. Exp lai n ing the rea·
sons for their inclus ion in the Constitution,
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar observed in the Constit u·
en t Asse mbl y l'l:
"Th is Article more or less fo ll ows the
pa tte rn of what is ca ll ed the Na tional
Recovery Act of th e Uni ted Sta tes passed
in 1933, wh ich gave the pres id ent power
to make s imi lar provisions in orde r to
remove the diffi culties, both economi·
ca l and financ ial , that had overtaken
th e America n peo pl e, as a resuil of the
Great Depress io n. ~
No Fina ncial Emergency ha s been declared so
far, though there was a financial crisi s in 1991.

CRITICISM OF THE EMERGENCY
PROVISIONS
So me members of' th e Constituent Asse mbly
criticised th e in co rporation of e me rge ncy
provi sions in the Con st itution 011 the fo llow·
ing grounds lS:
1. 'The fedem l character of th e Const itution
will be destroyed and the Union will
beco me al l powerful.
2 . T he powers of the State -both the Un io n
an d th e units- wi1J entire ly be can·
ce ntrated in the hands of the Union
exec utive.
3 . Th e Pres id ent will become a di ctato r.
4 . The financial autonomy of the state will
be nullified.
5. Fundamental ri ghts \\"ill become mea n·
ingless and, as a result, the democratic
foundation s of the Co nst itu tion will be
destroyed:

Thus, H.V. Ka rn a th observed: ' I fear that
by thi s single chapter we are seekin g to lay
th e foundation o fa tota litaria n sla.te, a poli ce
sta te, a s tate completel y opposed to all the
id eal s and prin cip les that we have he ld aloft
during the la st few decades, a State where the
ri ghts and lib erti es of mill ions of innoce nt
men and women will be in cO l1tinuolls jeopardy, a State wh ere if there be peace, it wi ll
be th e peace of the grave and the vo idof th e
desert. It will be a day of sham e a nd so rrow
when th e President makes usc of these powers
ha ving no parallel in a ny Co nstitution of th e
democrati c countries of the world, 16.
K.T. Shah desc ribed them as: 'A cha pte r of
reacti o n and retrog ress ion. I find one cann ot
but nqt ice two di stin ct currents of tho ugh':
underly in g a nd influe ncing throughout the
prov is io ns o f thi s chapter: (a) to arm th e
Ce ntre with specia l powe rs aga in st the un its
a nd (b) to arm the government aga inst the
p eop le '.
T.T. Krishnama chari feared that 'by mean s
of these provisions th e President <:Ind the
Exec ut ive would be exercis ing a form of co nsti tuti o nal di ctatorship ,17.
!-I .N. Kun zru opined that 'the emergency
financia l prov isio n s pose a se'ri ous threat to
the finan c ia l autonomy of the States.'
However, there were a lso p ro tago ni sts of
th e eme rge ncy provisi ons in th e Co nstituen.t
Asse mbl y. Thu s, Sir All adi Krishn,as wami
Ayyar labell ed them as 'the very life·breath
of th e Constitution '. Mahabir lYagi op in ed
that they wou ld work as a 'safety·valve' and
the reby help in the maintena ll ce of the C on ~
stitution 18.
While defending the emerge ncy provisions
in the Constituent Asse mbly, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar
also accepted the poss ibility of their misuse. H e
observed, ' I do nor altogether deny that there
is a possibi li ty of the Articl es being abused or
empl oyed for poli tica l purposes,lg.
.6Collstifll ellf Assemhly Debates, Volume I X, p . lOS .

'''CO IIStiIIJCllt AsscmlJiy Dehalcs, Volume X, pp.361-372.
.5Quotcd from M. V. PyIce, Illt/ia's CallstitlitiOlI,

S Chand, Fifth Edition , 1994, p. 280.

• i Ibid, p. 123.

"lb'l
It. p. ::>47.
.9rb itl, p. In.

I
,

1

I

Emergency Provisions
Table 17.2

~ 18 5

Articles Related to Emergency Provisions at a Glance

..

--. ,

"......._-

Effect of Proclamatfon of Emergency

---

Provisions in case of failure of constitutional machinery in states

-

~'-'

,

Exercise of legislative powers under proclamation issued under Article 356

~--

359A.
360. .

Application of this part to the state of Punjab (Repealed)

..-.-.,,- - ~--"'--"""-~-"--_M

Provisions as to Financial Emergency

Scan the QR Code to access the conceptual video on National
Emeq:ency and its impact on Political System and other important
topics on EDGE

In this Part...
18. President
19. Vice-President
20. Prime Minister
21. Central Council of Ministers
22. Cabinet Committees
23. Parliament

..

CHAPTER

18

rticles 52 to 78 in Part V of the Constit ution dea l with the Un ion executive.
The Union executive cons ists of the
Pres ide n t, th e Vice-President, the Prime
Min ister, the council of m in isters a n d the
atto rney genera l of In dia.
T he Presi d ent is the head of the Ind ian
State. He/ she is the first ci ti zen of India and
acts as the sy m bol of unity, integrity and
so li darity of the nat ion.

A

t ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT
The President is elected not directly by the
people hut by members of electora l co llege
consisti ng of:
1. the elected members of both the I-lou ses
of Parl iament; ·
2. the e lected members of t he legislative
assemb l ies of the states; and
3. the e lected members of the legislative
assemb lies of the Un ion Thrritories of
Delhi a nd Puducherryl.
Thus, the nom i nated members of both
the Houses of Parliamen t, th e nominated
me mbers of the state legislative assembl ies,
ITh is provision was added by t he 70th Con stitutional
Amendment Act of 1992 with effect from June I, 1995.

24. Parliamentary Committees
25. Indian Parliamentary Group
26. Supreme Court
27. Judicial Review
28. Judicial Activism
29. Public Interest Litigation

President

the members (both e lected and nominated)
of the sta te legislative co un c ils (in case of
the bicam eral legislature) and the nominated
members of the Legislative Assemblies of
De lh i a nd Puducherry do not participate in
the e lection of t he President.
The 104th Co nstitutio nal Amendment Act
of 2019 has not extended further the nomi·
nation of Anglo·lndian m embers to the Lok
Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies. In
other words, th e a m e ndment discontinued
the provision of special representation of the
Anglo·lndian com munity in the Lok Sabha
and Sta te Legi slative Assemblies by nomina·
tion. Co nsequentl y, this provision ceased to
have effect on the 25th January 2020.
Further, where a n assemb ly is di sso lved,
the members cease to be qualified to vote
in the pres idential e lect ion , eve n if fresh
elections to th e dissolved assemb ly are not
held before the preSi dentia l e lection.
The Constitution provides th at there shall
be u niformi ty in the scale of representation of
d iffe re nt states as well as parity between the
states as a whole and the Union at the election
of the President. 'Ib achieve this, the n umber
of vo tes wh ich each elected member of the
legis lative assemb ly of each sta te and the

President
Parliament is entitled to cast at such election
sha1l be determined in the following manner:
1. Every elected member of the legislative
assembly of a state shall have as many
votes as there are multiples of one thousand in the quotient obtained by dividing the population of the state by the
total number of the elected members of
the assemblyz. This can be expressed as:

Value of the vote of an MLA =
Total population of state
1
-:::=-="-'2:'::;=-=::"::"':':...:c::..::,.
x-Total n umber of elected
members in the state
legi slative assembly

I

J

,I

1000

2. Every elected member of either House
of Parliament shall have such number
of votes as may be obtained by dividing
the total number of votes assigned to
members of the legislative assemblies
of the states by the total number of the
elected members of both the Houses of
Parliament. This can be expressed as:

Value of the vote of an MP =
Total value of votes of all
MLAs of all states
Total number of elected
members of Parliam ent
An illustration of the value of votes of
each Member of the Legislative Assemblies
of the states, total value of votes of each of
the states, the value of votes of each Member
of Parliament, the total value of votes of the
Members of Parliament and the grand total
of value of all the members in the electoral
college for the presidential election, 2022 is
given in Thble 18.4.
The President's election is held in accordance
with the system ofproportionai representation
by means of the single transferable vote and the
voting is by secret ballot. This system ensures
that the successful candidate is returned by

I

-"

2Acco rding

to the 84th Constitutional Amendment
Act of 2001, the expression 'population' means the
population as ascertained at the 1971 census, until the
relevant figures for the first census taken after 2026
have been published.

~ 187

the absolute majority of votes. A candidate,
in order to be declared elected to the office of
President, must secure a fixed quota of votes.
The quota of votes is determined by dividing
the total number of valid votes polled by the
number of candidates to be elected (here only
one candidate is to be elected as President)
plus one and adding one to the quotient. The
formula can be expressed as:
Electoral quota =
Total number of valid votes polled
I + I = (2)

+ I

Each member of the electoral college is
given only one ballot paper. The voter, while
casting his/ her vote, is required to indi cate
his/her preferences by marking I , 2, 3, 4, etc.
against the names of ca ndidates. This means
that the voter ca n indicate as many prefer·
ences as there are candidates in the fray.
In the first phase, the first preference votes
are counted. In case, a candidate sec ures
the required quota in this phase, he /she is
declared eJected. Otherwise, the process of
transfer of votes is set in motion. The ballots
of the candidate securing the least number of
first preference votes are cancelled and his/
her seco nd preference votes are transferred
to the first preference votes of other candi·
dates. This process continues till a candidate
secures the required quota .
All doubts and disputes in connection with
election of the President are enquired into and
decided by the Supreme Court whose decision
is final. The election of a person as President
cannot be challenged on the ground that the
electoral college was incomplete (ie, existence of any vacancy among the members of
electoral college). If the election of a person
as President is declared void by the Supreme
Court, acts done by him / her before the date of
such declaration of the Supreme Court are not
invalidated and continue to remain in force.
Some members of the Constituent Assembly criticised the system of indirect election
for th e President as undemocratic and proposed the idea of direct election. However,

188

,r/Y Indian Polity

t he Co nst itutio n make rs c hose the ind irec t
elect ion due to the fo ll owing re<1 sons:l :
1. T he i nd i rect electi on o f the Pres ide n t
is i n ha rm o ny with t he pa rliame nta ry
syste m of govern me nt e n visaged in
t he Co n stit ution . Under th is syste m , the
Pres id e nt is on ly a n o mi nal exec u ti ve a nd t he rea l powe rs arc vested i n
th e counc il of m i nisters headed by the
Prime Mini ste r. It wo uld have been
a no malous to havc th e Pres ident elccted
d irec tl y by t he peo p le a n d n ot give
hi m / he r any real powe r.
2. The direct electi on of the Pres ide nt wo ul d
ha ve been very cost ly and t im e a nd
e ne rgy-co nsu min g due to t he vas t size
of the e lectora te. Th is is u nwa rran ted
keep ing in view that he/ she is only a
sym bo lic head.
So me mem be rs of th e Constitu e nt Assembl y
suggested th at the Pres ide nt should be e lec ted

.,

.

. COIIShlllClI1 Asselllbly Dc/HIICS, Vol u m e 1V, pp. 733-716

by the me mbe rs of the two 1·louses of Pa rli ament a lone. T he ma kers of the Co nst itut ion
d id not pre fer th is as the Pa rliam e nt , domimlted by o ne po l itica l pa rt y, wou ld have
invariably chosen a ca nd ida te fro m that pa rty
an d slI ch a Pres ide n t co uld not represe nt t he
sta tes of the Indi a n Un ion . The prese nt syste m
ma kes the President a represe ntati ve of the
Un ion a nd t he Sla tes equa lly.
furt he r, it was po in ted out i n th e Co nstitue n l Assem bly th <lt the exp ression 'p rop o rt io n ed re p rese n tat ion ' in th e ca se of
presiden ti a l e lec ti o n is a m is n omer. Pro po rt io nal re presentation takes p lace wh ere two
or more sca ts a re to be fi ll ed. In case of t he
Prcsidc n t, t he vacan cy is o nl y o n c. It co uld
better be Gll1 ed <I preferent ia l o r a lter nat ive
vote syste m. Simil a rly, the ex press io n 'si ngle
transfe ra ble vo te' was a lso objected o n t he
grou nd tha t no vo ter has a sin gle vote; every
vote r has pl ura l votes.
T he var ious pres ide ntia l electio ns he ld so
far arc summ arised in 'Tll ble J8. 1.

Ta ble 18.1 Elections of the Presidents (1952-till now)
51 No.

Election
Year

Victorious Candidate

No. of Votes
Secured (%)

Main Rival Candidate

No. of Votes
Secured (of,)

1.

1952

Dr. Rajendra Prasad

507400 (83.81)

K.T. Shah

92827 (15.3)

2.

1957

Dr. Rajendra Prasad

459698 (99.35)

N.N.Das

2000 (004)

1962

Dr. S. Radhakrishnan

553067 (98.24)

Ch . Hari Ram

6341 (1 .1)

1967

Dr. Zakir Hussain

471244 (56.23)

K. Subba Rao

363971(43.4)

5.

1969

V.v. Giri

420077 (50.22)

N. Sanjeeva Reddy

405427 (48.5)

6.

1974

Fakhruddin AU Ahmed

756587 (80.18)

Trldev Chaudhurl

189186 (19.8)

7.

1977

N. Sanjeeva Reddy

8.

1982

Giani ZaB Singh

754113 (72.73)

H.R. Khanna

282685 (27.6)

9.

1987

R. Venkataraman

740148 (72.29)

V. Krishna Ayyer

281550 (27.1)

10.

1992

Dr. Shankar Dayal Sharma

675564 (65.86)

George Swell

346485 (33.21)

11.

1997

K.R. Narayanan

956290 (94 97)

TN. Sheshan

50431(5.07)

12.

20'02

Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam

922844 (89.58)

Laxmi Sehgal

107366 (10.42)

13.

2007

Ms. Pratibha PatH

638116 (65.82)

B.S. Shekhawat

331306 (34.17)

14.

2012

Pranab Mukherjee

713763 (68.12)

P.A. Sangma

315987 (30.15)

15.

2017

Ram Nath Kovind

702044 (65.65)

Meira Kumar

367314 (34.35)

16.

2022

Droupadi Murmu

676803 (64.03)

Yashwant Sinha

380177 (35.97)

3.
4.

•

Unopposed

President

QUALIFICATIONS, OATH
AND CONDITIONS
Qualifications for Election as President
A person to be eligible for e lection as President should fulfil the fonowing qualifications:
1. He/she should be a citizen of India.
2. He/she should have completed 35 years
of age.
3. He/ she should be qualified for election
as a member of the Lok Sabha.
4. He /she should not hold any office of
profit under the Union government
or any state government or any local
authority or any other public authority.
A sitting President or Vice-President of
the Union, the Governor of any state and
a minister of the Union or any state is
not deemed to hold any office of profit
and hence qualified as a presidential
candidate.
Further, the nomination of a candidate for
election to the office of President must be
subscribed by at least 50 electors as proposers
and 50 electors as seconders. Every cand idate
has to make a security deposit of n5,OOO
in the Reserve Bank of India. The security
deposit is Hable to be forfeited in case the
candidate fails to secure one-sixth of the votes
polled. Before 1997, number of proposers
and seconders was ten each and the amount
of security deposit was f2 ,5 00. In 1997, they
were increased to discourage the non-serious
ca ndidates 4 •

Oath or Affirmation by the President
Before entering upon his/ her office, the Presi·
dent has to make and subscribe to an oath or
affirmation. In his/ her oath, the President
swears:
}. to faithfully execute the office;
2. to prese rve, protect and de fend the
Constitution and the law; and
3. to devote himself to the serv ice and wellbeing of the people of India.
~he presidential and vice-presidential Elections

Act of ]952, as amended in 1997.

~ 189

The oath of office to the President is
administered by the Chief Justice of India
and in his/ her absence, the seniormostjudge
of the Supreme Court available.
Any other person acting as President or discharging the functions of the President also
undertakes the simi lar oath or affirmation.

Conditions of President's Office
The Constitution lays down the following
conditions of the President's office:
1. He/she should not be a member of either
House of Parliament or a House of the
state legislature. If any such person is
elected as President, he/she is deemed to
have vacated his/her seat in that House
on the date on which he/she enters upon
his/ her office as President.
2 . He/she should not hold any other office
of profit.
3. He /she is entitled, without payment of
rent, to the use of his/ her official residence (the Rastrapathi Bhavan).
4 . He/she is entitled to such emoluments,
allowances and privileges as may be
determined by Parliament.
5. His/ her emoluments and allowances cannot be diminished during his/ her term
of office.
In 2018, the Parli ament in c reased the
sa lary of the President from f1.50 lakh to
fS lakh per month<la. Earlier in 2008, the pension of the retired President was increased from
f3 lakh per a nnum to 50% of his/her salary
per month5 . In addition, the former Presidents
are entitled to furnished residence, phone
facilities, car, medical treatme nt, travel facility, secretarial staff and office expenses upto
fl,OO,OOO per annum. The spouse of a deceased
President is also entitled to a family pension
at the rate of 50% of pension of a retired President, furnished residence, phone facility, car,
4aVide the Finan ce Act, 2018, with effect from 1st
January, 2016. This Act amended the President's
Emoluments and Pensio n Act, 1951.
s.rhe President's Emoluments and Pension Amendment Act of2008.

190

,rf! Indian Polity

medica l t reat me n t, travel fac il ity, secretarial
sta ff a nd office expen ses upto f20, OOO per
a nnum .
Th e Presi de nc is e n titled to a n umber o f
privil eges a nd immu n ities. He/s he e njoys
pe rsonal immu nity fro m legal l ia bility fo r
h is/her officia l acts. Du rin g h is/ h e r te rm of
office, he/she is imm u ne fro m a ny c riminal proceedi n gs, eve n ill respect of his/ h er
p ersonal a cts. H e/ she ca nno t be arr es ted
or impri son ed. Howeve r, after g iving two
mon ths' notice, c ivil proceedi ngs can be inst ituted again st h im / he r du r in g his/ h er term of
offi ce in resp ect of hi s/ her pc rso l1 ill a cts.

j

TERM, IMPEACHME NT AND
VACANCY

Term of President's O ffice
The Presiden t holds office fo r a term of fi ve
yea rs from the da te on whi ch he/she enters
upon hi s/her office. However, he/ she ca n resign
from h is/ her office at a ny ti me by addressing
the res ignation lette r to the Vice- Preside nt.
Fu rther, he/she can a lso be re moved from the
offi ce before comp let ion of h is/ her term by the
process of impeachm e nt.
The Pres ide n t ca n ho ld office beyon d h is/
he r term of fi ve years u n til hi s/ he r successor
assum es charge. He / sh e is also e li gib le fo r reelection to that office. He/ sh e may be elected
fo r a ny nu mber of terms 6 . Howeve r, i n USA, a
p e rson ca n not be e lected to th e o ffice of t he
Presiden t mo re than t wice.

Impeachment of President
Th e Pres id e n t ca n be removed from office by
a process of i mpeachm e nt fo r 'v iola tio n of
the Co nstitu tio n '. Howeve r, t he Const itu tion
does n ot defin e th e mea n ing of t he ph rase
'violatio n of the Cons ti t ution'.
The impeachmen t charges ca n be in itiated by
eithe r House of the Pa rliament. These charges
sho uld be sign ed by o ne-fou rth m embers of

t he Hou se (th a t fra med the cha rges), a nd a
14 days' notice shoul d be given to the Pres iden t.
After the im peachm ent resolut ion is passed
by a maj ority of two-th irds of the tota l me mbersh ip of that House, it is se nt to the other
House, which should in vestigate the cha rges.
T he Pres ident has the right to appea r and to be
represented at such invest igation. If t he other
House also susta ins the charges and passes the
impeachme nt resolu tion by a majority of twoth irds of t he tota l me mbe rsh ip, the n the Preside nt stands re moved from his/ he r office from
the date on wh ich the reso luti on is so passed.
Th us, a n impeachm ent is a quas i-j udi cia l
p rocedure in the Pa rli a me nt. In th is con text,
two t hin gs shou ld be no ted: (a) t he nominated m e mb ers of e ithe r House of Pari ia me nt
can pa rtic ipa te in t he impeac hm e nt of the
Pres id e nt though they do not partic ipate in
his/ her elect io n and (b) th e e lected me mbe rs
of the leg islative asse m bli es of sta tes and th e
Un ion Th rr itor ies of Delhi and Pudu ch e rry
do n ot partic ipate in the impeac hm e nt of t he
Presi den t though they partici pa te in h is/ h er
e lect io n .
It m ust be noted he re t hat no Pres ide nt has
so far been impeac hed.

Vacancy in the President's Office
A vaca n cy in t he Pres ide nt's office ca n occur

in a ny o f th e fo ll ow ing ways:
] . On the ex pi ry of hi s/ her te n ure of five
yea rs.
2. By his / he r res ignation.
3. On h is/ her re mova l by th e process of
impeachm ent.
7
4. By his/ he r dea th •
5. Orherw ise, for exa m ple, wh en he/ she
becomes di sq ua li fied to hold office or
wh e n hi s/ her elect io n is decla red voi d.
When th e vaca ncy is going to be ca used
by th e ex piratio n of th e term of th e sitting
President, a n election to fill th e vaca ncy must
be he ld before the ex pirat ion of th e te rm . In
rar two Presidents, Dr. Za kir Hussai n a nd
Fa kh ruddi n Ali Ah med, h,we died d u ri n g their

i SO

6NO person except Dr. R."lje nd ra Prasad h,1S occupied
the offi ce for two te rms.

lc rm of office.

I

I

194 ,~ Indian Polity
Milit ary Powers
He/ she is t he su p reme cOlllma nde r of th e
defe nce fo rces of Ind ia. In th at ca pa city, hel
she a ppoints th e chi efs of the Ar my, the Navy
a nd th e Air Force. He / sh e ca n decla re war
o r concl ude pea ce, subj ec t to t he a pp rova l of
th e Parl iam e n t.

Emergency Powers
In addition to the n orm a l powers m e nt ion ed
above, the Con stit ution confers extraordin ary
powers o n th e Pres ide n t to dea l with th e fo 1·
lowi ng th ree types of e m e rge nc ies:
(<I) Na t iona l Em e rge ncy (A rti cl e 352) ;
(11) President's Rule (A rticle 356 & 365) ; a nd
(c ) Fi nanc ia l Em e rgency (Arti cle 360)

(a) National Emergency: Th e Pre side n t can
proclaim e me rge ncy i n the e n tire co un t ry
o r in a ny pa rt of it on the foll ow i ng gro unds:
(i) War or
( i i) Ex ternal aggress ion or
( i i i) Arm ed rebe lli on
T h e Pr es ide n t a c quires t h e follow i ng
e x traord i n a ry po we rs d u ring a n at ional
e m ergen cy:
(i) He/ she can m od ify the pa tte rn of t he
di st r ib u t io n of fin an c ia l re so u rcres
be twee n th e Unio n a nd the states.
(i i) He/ she ca n suspe nd t he Fu nda m ental
Ri gh ts o f c iti ze ns except th e right to li fe
and pers01w l liberty (A rticle 21) a nd the
right to protect io n in respect of comrietio n fo r offen ces (A rti cl e 20) .

(b) President 's Rule: It is a lso known a s a
state em e rgen cy or a constitut io na l e m e rgen cy. It can be p rocla im ed by the Pres ide n t
o n the fo ll ow ing grou nds:
( i) Fa ilu re of co nstitutio na l machi nery in the
states ( Article 356) or
( i i) Fa il ure to comp ly with or to give effect to
directio ns gi ve n by th e Un io n ( Art icle
365)
Th e Pre s id e nt ac q uires t h e fo ll owing
ex traord in a ry powers whe n th e Pres ide n t's
ru le is imposed in a state:

( i) '-Ie/ she ca n assign to h im self a ll o r a ny

of the fun ct io ns of the state govern me nt
a nd a ll o r a ny of the powers vested in the
gove rno r o r anybody or autho rity in the
st:.1.te.
( ii) He / she can declare that th e powers of
the stat e leg islature s hall be exe rci sab le by o r unde r the aut hority of th e
Pa rl ia m e nt.
( iii) I-i e/ sh e ca n autho r ise, when the Lok
Sa bha is not in sess ion , expe nd iture
fro m the Co nso li da ted Fund of th e state,
pe ndi ng t he sanctio n of such expe nd iture by the Pa rli amen t.
Th e Pre s id ent
can pro c l a i m fi nan c ial e m e rgenc y if
he / s he is sat isfied that t he fina n cia l sta bil ity or c re dit of In d ia or an y par t the reof, is
th reat en ed.
During a fin a nci a l e m e rgency, the Pres ide n t can iss ue direc tion s for the redu ct io n
of salari es a nd a ll o'wa nces of a ll or a ny class
of pe rso ns serving in conn ect ion wi th th e
a ffa irs of t he Uni on , i ncl udin g the judges of
t he Su pre m e Court and Hig h Co urts.
(c) Financial Emergency :

j

VETO POWER OF THE
PRESIDENT

A b ill passed by the Pa rl iam e n t ca n beco me
a n act on ly if it re ce ives the asse n t of the
Preside n t. When suc h a bi ll is p rese n te d
to the Preside n t fo r hi s a sse n t, he/ she has
t hree a lte rnati ves (u nd e r Article 111 of the
COll sti t u tio n) :
1. He/ she may give his asse nt to the bill, or
2 . He/ she m ay withh old hi s/h e r asse n t to
the b ill , or
3. He/ she may ret urn th e b ill (i f it is not a
Mo ney bill ) for reco nsiderat ion of the
Pa rli a m e n t. Howeve r, if the bilI is passed
again by the Parli a m ent wi th or witho ut
a m e ndments and aga in prese nted to th e
Pres ide n t, t he Presiden t mu st gi ve h is/
he r asse nt to the b ill.

____ ____________________________.cP""=,,~·d:'en~'_tJ
~,, 191
case of any delay in conducting the election
of new Pres ident by any reaso n, the outgoing
President continues to hold office (beyond
hi s/ h er term of fi ve yea rs) until hi s/ h e r
successor assumes charge. This is provided
by the Constitution in order to preve nt an
' interregnum'. In thi s situation, the Vice·
President does not get the opportunity to act
as Presiden t or to discharge the fun ctions of
the President.
If the office falls vaca nt by resignation,
removal , deat h or otherwise, then election
to fill the vaca ncy should be held within six
month s from the date of the occurrence of
such a vaca ncy. The n ewl y-elected President
remains in offi ce for a fun term of fi ve years
from th e date h e/she assumes charge of hi s/
her office.
When a vacancy occurs in the office of the
Pres ident due to his/her resignation, remova l,
death o r otherwise, the Vice-Presiden t acts as
the President until a new President is elected.
Further, wh en the sitting President is unabl e
to di scharge his/her fun ctions du e to absence,
illness or any other ca use, the Vice-President
discharges his/ her functions until the Pres ident resum es his/her office.
In case the offi ce of Vice-President is
vaca nt, the Chief Ju stice of India (or if hi s/
h er office is also vacant, the se niormost judge
of the Suprem e Court available) acts as the
President or di scharges the functions of the
Presidents.
When a ny person, ie, Vice-Pres ident, chi ef
justice of India , or the seniormost judge of
the Supreme Court is acting as the President
or discharging th e functions of the President,
h e/s he enjoys all the powers and immuniti es of the Preside nt and is entitled to such
emoluments, allowan ces and privileges as are
determined by the Parliament.

.,·1

,

I

8For exa mpl e, when President Dr. Zakir Hu ssain
died in May, 1969, the then Vice-President, V.V. Giri
was acting as the Presiden t. Soon after V.V. Giri
resigned to contest the election of the President.
Then the Chief Justice of India, M. Hidayatullah
worked as the officiating President from 20 July,
1969 to 24 August, J969.

POWERS AND FUNCTIONS
OF THE PRESIDENT
The powers e njoyed and the functions performed by the President can be studi ed under
the following heads:
1. Executive powers
2. Leg islat ive powers
3. Financial powers
4. Judicial powers
5. Diplomatic powers
6. Military powers
7. Emergency powers

Executive Powers
The executi ve powers and fun ctions of th e
Pres ident are:
(a) All executi ve actions of the Government
of India are forma11 y taken in hi s/h er
nam e.
(b) He/sh e ca n make rules specifying the
ma nn er in which the orde rs and other
instruments made and executed in hi s/
her name shall be authenti cated.
(c) He /sh e can make rules for more convenient transaction of busi ness of the
Union government, and for allocation of
the sa id bus iness among the mini sters.
(d) He/she appoints the Prime Minister and
the other ministers. They hold office
during hi s/h er pleasure.
(e) He/sh e appoints th e attorney general of
Indi a and determil.1 es hi s/her remuneration. The attorney general holds office
du ring the pleasure of the President.
(f) He/she appoints the comptrol1er and
auditor general of India , the chief election commissioner and other election
co mmi ss ion er s, the chairman a nd
members of the Union Publi c 'Se rvice
Commissio n, the governors of states,
the chairman and members of finance
commission, and so on.
(g) He/she can seek an y information relating to the administration of affairs of
the Union, and proposal s for legislation
from the prime minister.
(h) He/she can require the Prime Minister to
submit , for co nsideration of the council

192 ,¥1 ,ndian Polity
of m inister s, a ny ma tter on whi ch a dcc i·
s ion has bee n ta ke n by a mi ni ste r bu t,
which has not bee n co nside red by t he

coun ci l.
( i) He / she can a ppoi nt a co mmi ss ion to
invest iga te into t he cond it ion s of ba ck·
wa rd cl asses.
(j) He/ she ca n a ppoi nt a n inter·St.'l (e cOll ncil
to pro mote Ce ntre-s ta te a nd inter-s ta te
coo pe ration .
(k) He/ she direct l y ad mini ste rs t he un ion
te rri to rie s t hro u g h adm in is tra to r s
a ppo inted by him / h e r.
( I) He/ she ca n declar e a ny area as sched uled
area a nd has powe rs with respec t to t he
admin istrati on of sched ul ed <lfeas a nd
triba l areas.

Legislative Powers
T he Presid en t is a n integr a l p'::l rt of th e Par·
li a me nt of In d ia, a n d e njoys t he fo ll ow ing
legisla ti ve powe rs.
(a) He /she ca n summ o n or prorog ue the
Parlia men t an d di sso lve t he Lo k Sa bha .
He/ she can a lso sum mo n a jOint sittin g of b oth th e Ho uses of Pa rli a men t,
whi c h is presid ed over by t he Speak e r
o f th e Lo k Sa bha .
(b) He/sh e can address th e Pa rlia ment at th e
co mm en ce me nt of th e fi rst sessio n a fte r
each ge ne ra l e lectio n a nd th e first sessio n of ea c h year.
(c) He/ she ca n se nd messages to the Houses
of Pa rli a m e n t, whe the r wit h res pec t
to a bill pe ndi ng in t he Pa rli am e nt or
otherwise.
(d ) He/sh e ca n a ppo int a ny m e mber of
th e Lok Sabha to pres id e ove r its proceedin gs whe n t he offi ces of bot h th e
Spea ke r and t he Dep uty Spea ke r fa ll
va c a n t. Sim i larl y, he / s h e c a n a lso
ap poin t a ny me mbe r of t he Jt.1jya Sa bh a
to pres ide over its proce ed ings whe n the
offi ces of both th e Ch': lirma n an d th e
De pu ty Chai rm a n fall vaca nt.
(e) Hc /she n omina tes 12 me mbers of t he
Raj ya Sa bh a from a m o n gst p e rson s

hav in g spec ia l knowledge o r pra c t i ~1 1
ex per ien ce in li teratu re, sc ie nce, a rt a nd
social se rvice.
(f) He/ she no m ina ted ( before 2020) two
me m be rs to t he Lok Sa bha fro m t he
A nglO- In d ia n c o mm uni ty. Howe ve r,
t he 104th Con sti tu t ional Ame nd m e n t
Ac t of 20 19 h,as d isco nt i nu e d thi s

prov is ion.
(g) '-Ie / s he d ec ides o n qu es ti o ns a s to
di squ,a li fi cation s of me mbe rs of th e
Pa rli a me n t, i n con sul tati o n with the
Elec tion Co mm iss io n .
( h) Hi s/ he r p ri o r reco mm enda tion or pe rm iss io n is neede d to int rodu ce certai n
ty pes of b ill s in t he Pa rl iam e nt. T hey
are: ( i) a bill i n vo lvi ng ex pe n d iture
fro l11 the Co nso lidate d Fu nd of India ,
( ii) a bill for the al tem tion of bou n d·
a ri es of st,lte s or c reati o n of a ne w
sta te, ( iii ) a mo n ey bi ll, ( iv) a b ill
that im poses o r varies any tax o r duty
in whi ch states are i nte rested , (v) a
b ill whi c h varies th e mean ing of th e
ex press ion 'agr ic ul tural in co me' as
define d fo r t he p urpos es of the ena ctme n ts re lat ing to Ind ian inco me ta x,
(vi) a b ill whi c h affec ts th e pri nci ples
o n wh ic h sum s o f mo ney are or may
be d istribu tab le to st.: It CS a nd (v ii) a
b ill tha t im poses (i ny surc ha rge on a ny
sp ec ified ta x or duty for the pu rpo se of
th e centre.
Furthe r, a Slate bill im posing restriction s
o n th e freedo m of t rad e, co mm erce a n d
intercourse with tha t st.-1le or with in that
sl:.:1 te ca n be introd u ced in the leg isla ture
of the state on ly with th e previo us san ctio n o f t he Presid e nt.
(i) Wh e n a bill is se nt to t he Pres id e nt a fte r
it ha s bee n passed by the Parli am en t,
he / she ca n :
( i) give h is/ he r asse nt to the bill, o r
(ii) withh old hi s/ he r asse lH to t he bi ll ,
oc
( ii i) return t he bill ( if it is not a mon ey
bi ll ) for reco n s ide ra ti on of th e
Pa rli a me nt.

I

President

r

(D

However, if the bill is passed again
by the Parliament, with or without
amendments, the President has to
give his/ her assent to the bill.
When a bill passed by a state legislature
is reserved by the governor for consideration of the President, the President
ca n:
(i) give his/ her assent to the bill, or
(ii) withhold his/ her assent to the bill,
or

(iii) direct the governor to return the
bill (if it is not a money bill) for
reconsideration of the state legislature. It should be noted here that it
is not obligatory for the President
to give his/her assent even if the
bi11 is again passed by the state
legislature and sent again t.o him /
her for his/ her consideration.
(k) He/she can promulgate ordinances when
the Parliament is not in session. These
ordinances must be approved by the
Parliament within six weeks from its
reassembly. He/she can also withdraw
an ordinance at any time.
(I) He/she lays the reports of the
Comptroller and Auditor General, Union
Public Service Commission, Finance
Commission, and others, before the
Parliament.
(rn) He /she can make regulations for the
peace, progress and good government
of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands,
Lakshadweep, Dadra and Nagar Haveli
and Daman and Diu and Ladakh. In the
case of Puducherry also, the President
can legislate by making regulations but
only when the assembly is suspended or
dissolved.

Financial Powers
The financial powers and functions of the
President are:
(a ) Money bills can be introduced in
the Parliament only with hi s prior
recommendation.

~, 193

(b) He /she causes to be laid before the

Parliament the annual financial statement (ie, the Union Budget).
( c) No demand for a grant can be made
except on his recommendation.
(d) He/she can make advances out of the
contingency fund of India to meet any
unforeseen expenditure.
(e) He/she constitutes a finance commission
after every five years to recommend the
distribution 'Jf revenues between the
Centre and the states.

Judicial Powers
The judicial powers and functions of the
President are:
(a) He/she appoints the Chief Justice and
the judges of Supreme Court and high
courts.
(b) He/she can seek advice from the Supreme
Court on any question of law or fact.
However, the advice tendered by the
Supreme Court is not binding on the
President.
(c ) He /she can grant pardon, reprieve,
respite and remission of punishment,
or suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any
offence:
(i) In al1 cases where the punishment
or sentence is by a court martial;
(ii) In all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an offence
against a Union law; and
(iii) In all cases where the sentence is
a sentence of death.

Diplomatic Powers
The ·i nternational treaties and agreements
are negotiated and conc1l!-ded on behalf of
the Pres ident. However, they are subject to
the approval of the Parliament. He/she represents India in international forums and
affairs and sends and rece ives diplomats
like ambassadors, high commissioners, and
so on.

President

Thus, the President has the veto power
over the bills passed by the Parliament9 , that
is, he/she can withhold his/her assent to the
bills. The object of conferring this power on
the President is two·fold- (a) to prevent hasty
and ill·considered legislation by the ParHa·
ment; and (b) to prevent a legislation which
may be unconstitutional.
The veto power enjoyed by the executive
"in modern states can be classified into the
following four types:
1. Absolute veto, that is, withholding of
assent to the biU passed by the legislature.
2. Qualified veto, which can be overridden
by the legislature with a higher majority.
3. Suspensive veto, which can be overridden
by the legislature with an ordinary
majority.
4. Pocket veto, that is, taking no action on
the bill passed by the legislature.
Of the above four, the President of India is
vested with three-absolute veto, suspensive
veto and pocket veto, There is no qualified veto
in the case of Indian President; it is possessed
by the American President. The three vetos of
the President of India are explained below:

Absolute Veto
It refers to the power of the President to
withhold his assent to a bill passed by the
Parliament. The bill then ends and does not
become an act. Usually, this veto is exercised
in the following two cases:
(a) With respect to private members' bills
(ie, bills introduced by any member of
Parliament who is not a minister); and
(b) With respect to the government bills when
the cabinet resigns (after the passage
of the bills but before the assent by the
President) and the new cabinet advises
the President not to give his assent to
such bills.
In 1954, President Dr. Rajendra Prasad withheld his assent to the PEPSU Appropriation
go'Veto' is a Latin word that connotes 'forbid'.

~ 195

Bill. The bill was passed by the Parliament
when the President's Rule was in operation
in the state of PEPSU IO , But, when the bill was
presented to the President for his assent, the
President's Rule was revoked.
Again in 1991, President R Venkataraman
withheld his assent to the Salary, Allowances
and Pension of Members of Parliament
(Amendment) Bill. The bil1 was passed by the
Parliament (on the last day before dissolution
of Lok Sabha) without obtaining the previous
recommendation of the President.

Suspensive Veto
The President exercises this veto when he/she
returns ·a bill for reconsideration of the Par·
liament. However, if the bill is passed again
by the Parliament with or without amend·
ments and again presented to the President,
it is obligatory for the President to give his
assent to the biB. This means that the presi·
dential veto is overridden by a re-passage of
the bill by the same ordinary majority (and
not a higher majority as required in USA).
As mentioned earlier, the President does not
possess this veto in the case of money bills.
The President can either give his/ her assent
to a money bi11 or withhold his/ her assent
to a money bill but cannot return it for the
reconsideration of the Parliament. Normally,
the President gives his/ her assent to a money
bill as it is introduced in the Parliament with
his/ her previous permission.

Pocket Veto
In this case, the President neither ratifies nor
rejects nor returns the bill, but simply keeps
the bill pending for an indefinite period. This
power of the President not to take any action
(either positive or negative) on the bill is
known as the pocket veto. The President can
IOryhe Patiala and East Punjab States Union (PEPSU)
was merged into the Punjab State in 1956.

196 ,(/ Ind;an Polity
exercise thi s veto power as the Con stitution
does not presc ribe an y time-limit within
wh ich h e/ she ha s to take the decision with
respect to a bill prese nted to him / her for hi s/
her asse nt. In USA, on the other hand, the
President has to return the bill for reconsideration with in 10 days. Hence, it is remarked that
the pocket of the Indian Pres ident is bigge r
than th at of the Americ<111 President.
In 1986, Pres ident Zail Singh exerci sed the
pocke t ve to with respect to the Indian Post
Office (Amendment) Bill. The bill, passed by
the Rajiv Gandhi Government, imposed restri ction s on th e freedom of press a nd hence, was
widely criticised. After three years, in 1989, the
next President R Venkataraman se nt the bill
back for reconsi deration, bu t the new National
Front Government decided to drop the bill.
It should be noted here that the Pre sident
ha s n o ve to power in respect of a constitutional amendment bill. The 24th Constitutional Amendment Act of 1971 mad e it
obligatory for the Preside nt to give his assent
to a con st itutional amendme nt bill.

Presidential Veto over State Legislation
The Preside nt has veto power with res pect
to state leg islation also. A bill passed by a
state legislat ure can become an act only if
it receives the asse n t of the governor or the
Pres ident (in case the bill is reserved for the
consideration of the President).
Whe n a bill, passed by a sta te legi slatu re, is
p rese nted to the governor for his/ her assent,
he/ she has four alternatives (under Article 200
of the Constitution):
Table 18.2

1 . He / she may give his / her assent to the
bill , or
2 . He / she m ay withho ld his/h e r a sse nt to
the bill, or
3. He/ she may return the bill (if it is not a
mon ey bill) for reco nside ration of the
state legislature, or
4. He/ she may rese rve the bill for th e co nside ration of the Pres ide nt.
When a bill is rese rved by the governor for
the co n sid era tion of the Pres ident , the President has three alternatives (Under Article 201
of th e Con stitution ):
1. He/ sh e may g ive his/h er assent to the
bill , or
2. He/she may withhold his / her assent to
the bill, or
3. He/ she may direct the governor to return
the bill ( if it is not a money bill ) for
the reconsideration of the state legislature. If the bill is passed again by
th e sta te legi slature with or witho ut
amendments and prese nted again to
t he Pres ident for hi s/ h e r asse nt, the
President is not bound to give hi s/her
assent to the bill. This m ea n s that the
state legi slature ca nnot override th e
veto power of the President. Further,
the Constitution has not prescribed any
tim e limit within which th e Presi d e nt
has to take deci sion with regard to a
bill reserved b y the governor for his/
her consideration. He nce, the President
can exercise poc ket veto in respect of
state legislation a lso.
Table 18.2 s ummari ses the di scuss ion on
th e veto power of the Preside nt with rega rd
to Ce ntral as well as state legislation.

Veto Power of the President at a Glance

Central l eg is lat ion

State l egislation

With Regard to Ordinary Bills

1. Can be ratlfled

1. Can be ratlfled

2. Can be rejected

2. Can be rejected

3. Can be returned

3. Can be returned""---~-~-----""

"I,

President

(
Central legislation

~, 197

State legislation

With Regard to Money B:I:":,;.
S ~_ _ _ _ _ _ ~
.• _ _ _ _ _ _,=.•~~ ......- ___ ._
1. Can ~;-r~l~fl;d •....,---,-.
-~.......,.1·.~ Can be ratified

l

2. Can be rejected (but cannot be returned)

2. Can be rejected (but cannot be returned)

1

~-~

With Regard to Constitutional Am&ndment Bills
Can only be ratified (that is, cannot be rejected or
returned)

ORDINANCE-MAKING POWER
OF THE PRESIDENT

)

Article 123 of the Constitution empowers the
President to promulgate ordinances during
the recess of Parliament. These ordinances
have the same force and effect as an act of
Parliament, but .are in the nature of temporary laws.
The ordinance-making power is the most
important legislative power of the President.
it has been vested in him/her to deal with
unforeseen or urgent matters. But, the exercise of this power is subject to the following
four limitations:
1. He/she can promulgate an ordinance
only when both the Ho,!ses of Parliament
are not in session or when either of the
ovo Houses of Parliament is not in session. An ordinance can also be issued
when only one House is in session
because a law can be passed by both the
Houses and not by one House alone. An
ordinance ' made when both the Houses
are in session is void. Thus, the power of
the President to legislate by ordinance is
not a parallel power of legislation.
2. He/she can make an ordinance only
when he/she is satisfied that the circum·
stances exist that render it necessary for
him/ her to take immediate action. In the
Cooper case ll , (1970), the Supreme Court
held that the President's satisfaction
can be questioned in a court on the
ground of malafide. This means that
the decision of the President to issue an
llCooper vs. Ullion of India (1970).

Constitutional amendment bills cannot be introduced in
the state legislature.

ordinance can be questioned in a court
on the ground that the President has
prorogued one House or both Houses
of Parliament deliberately with a view
to promulgate an ordinance on a controversial subject, so as to bypass the
parliamentary decision and thereby
circumventing the authority of the
Parliament. The 38th Constitutional
Amendment Act of 1975 made the
President's satisfaction final and conclusive and beyond judicial review. But,
this provision was deleted by the 44th
Constitutional Amendment Act of 1978.
Thus, the President's satisfaction is justiciable on the ground of malafide.
3. His ordinance-making power is coextensive as regards all matters except duration, with the law-making powers of the
Parliament. This has two implications:
(a) An ordinance can be issued only
on those subjects on which the
Parliament can make laws.
(b) An ordinance is subject to the same
constitutional limitation as an act
of Parliament. Hence, an ordinance
cannot abridge or take away any of
the fundamental rights 12 .
4. Every ordinance issued by the President
during the recess of Parliament must be
laid before both the Houses of Parliament
when it reassembles. If the ordinance is
approved by both the Houses, it becomes
an act. If Parliament takes no action at
I"he definition of 'law' contained in Article 13
expressly includes ordinances.

198 ,~/ndian Polity
all, the ordinance ceases to operate on
the expiry of six weeks from the reassembly of Parliament. The ordinance
may also cease to operate even earlier
than the prescribed six weeks, if both
the Houses of Parliament pass resolutions disapproving it. If the Houses of
Parliament are summoned to reasse mble
on different dates, the period of s ix
weeks is calculated from the later of
those dates. This means that the maximum life of an ordinance can be six
months and six weeks, in case of nonapproval by the Parliament (six months
being the maximum gap between the two
sessions of Parliament). If an ordina nce
is allowed to lapse without be ing placed
before Parliament, then the acts done and
completed under it, before i t ceases to
operate, remain fully va li d and effective.
The President can also withdraw an ord inance at any time. However, his/ her power
of ordinance-making is not a discretionary
power, and he/she can promulgate or ,vithdraw
an ordinance only on the advice of the council
of ministers headed by the Prime Minister.
An ordinance like any other legislation, ca n
be retrospective, that is, it may come into force
from a back date. It may modify or repeal any
act of Parliament or another ordinance. It can
a lter or amend a tax law also. However, it cannot be issued to amend th e Constitution.
The ordinance-making power of the President in India is rather unusual and not fo und
in most of th e democratic Constitutions of
the world including that of USA, and UK. In
justification of the ordinance-making power
of the President, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar said in the
Constituent Assembly that the mechani sm of
issuing an ordinance has been devised in order
to enable the Executive to dea l with a situation
that may suddenly and immediately arise when
the Parliament is not in session l3 . It must be
clarified here that the ordinance-making power
of the President has no necessary connection
with the national emergency envisaged in Article 352. The President can issue an ordinance
IJConstituellt Assembly Debates, Volume VIII, p. 213.

even when there is no war or external aggression or armed rebellion.
The rules of Lok Sabha require that whenever a bi ll seeking to replace an ordinance is
introduced in th e House, a statement explaining the circum sta nces that h ad necessitated
immediate legislation by ordinance should
also be placed before the House.
The Supreme Court's judgement relating
to the ordinance-making power of th e Governor in the D. C. Wadhwa case l4 (1986) is
worth mentioning here. In th at case, the court
poin ted out that between 1967-1981, the Governor of Bihar promulgated 256 ordinances and
all these were kept in force for periods ranging
from one to fourt een years by repromu lgation
from time to time. The court ruled that success ive repromulgatioll of ordinances with
the sa me text without a ny attempt to get the
bills passed by the assembly would amou n t
to violation of the Constitution and the ordi·
nance so repromu lgated is liabl e to be struck
down. It held that the exceptional power of
law-making through ordjnance cannot be used
as a substitute for the legislative power of the
state legislature.

PARDONING POWER OF THE
PRESIDENT
Article 72 of the Constitution empowers the
President to grant pardons to persons who
have been tried and convicted of any offence
in a ll cases where the:
1 . Punishment or sentence is for an offence
against a Union Law;
2. Punishm e nt or se nten ce is by a court
martial (military court); a nd
3. Sentence is a se nten ce of death.
The pardoning power of the President is
independent of the Judi ciary. The Preside n t
while exercising this power, does not sit as a
court of appeal. The object of conferring this
judicial power on the Pres ident is two-fo ld:
(a) to keep the door open for correcting any
judicia l errors in the operation of law; and,
14 D.C. Watlhwa vs. Srare of Bihar ( 1986).

,

f

President!l 199

(b) to afford relief from a sentence, which the
President regards as unduly harsh.
The pardoning power of the President
includes the following:

t. Pardon It removes both the sentence and
the eonviction and completely absolves the
convict from all sentences, punishments and
disqualifications.
2. Commutation It denotes the substitution of
one furm of punishment for a lighter form. For
example, a death sentence may be commuted to
rigorous imprisonment, which in turn may be
commuted to a simple imprisonment.
3. Remission It implies reducing the period
of sentence without changing its character.
For example, a sentence of rigorous imprisonment for two years may be remitted to rigorous imprisonment for one year.
4. Respite It denotes awarding a lesser
sentence in place of one originally awarded
due to some special fact, such as the physical
disability of a convict or the pregnancy of a
woman offender.
5. Reprieve It implies a stay of the execution
of a sentence (especially that of death) for a
temporary period. Its purpose is to enable
the convict to have time to seek pardon or
commutation from the President.
Under Article 161 of the Constitution, the
governor of a state also possesses the pardoning power. Hence, the governor can also grant
pardons, reprieves, respites and remissions of
punishment or suspend, remit and commute
the sentence of any person convicted of any
offence against a state law. But, the pardoning
power of the governor differs from that of the
President in following two respects:
1. The President can pardon sentences
inflicted by court martial (military
courts) while the governor cannot.
2. The President can pardon death sentence
while governor cannot. Even if a state law
prescribes death sentence, the power to
grant pardon lies with the President and
n.ot the governor. However, the governor

can suspend, remit or commute a death
sentence. In other words, both the governor and the President have concurrent
power in respect of suspension, remission
and commutation of death sentence.
In Kehar Singh case l4il (1988), the Supreme
Court examined the pardoning power of the
President and laid down the following principles:
1. The petitioner for mercy has no right to
an oral hearing by the President:
2. The President Can examine the evidence
afresh and take a view different from the
view taken by the court.
3. The power is to be exercised by the
President on the advice of the union
cabinet.
4. There is no need for the Supreme Court
to lay down specific guidelines for the
exercise of power by the President.
5. The exercise of power by the President is
not subject to judicial review except where
the presidential decision is arbitrary, irrational, mala fide or discriminatory.

CONSTITUTIONAL POSITION
OFTHE PRESIDENT
The Constitution of India has provided for
a parliamentary form of government. Consequently, the President has been made only a
nominal executive; the real executive being
the council of ministers headed by the prime
minister. In other words, the President has to
exercise his/her powers and functions with
the aid and advise of the council of ministers
headed by the Prime Minister.
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar summed up the true position of the President in the following waylS:
"In the Indian Constitution, there is placed
at the head of the Indian Union a function·
ary who is called the President of the Union.
The title of the functionary reminds of the
President of the United States. But beyond
the identity of names, there is nothing in
14aKehar Singh vs. Union of India (1988).
ISColtstituent Assembly Debates, Volume VII, pp. 32-34.

200 ,yj' lndian Polity
common between the form of governm en t
prevalen t in Ameri ca a nd the form of government adopted under th e Indian Co n sti tution. The Am eri ca n form of gove rnm en t is
call ed the presiden tial syste m of governm en t
and what th e In dia n Constitution adop ted
is the Parliam en ta ry syste m . Un der the
p residen tial system of Am erica, th e Pres ident is th e Chief h ead of the Executi ve a nd
admi n istrat ion is vested in him . Unde r th e
Indian Consti tution , the Presiden t occu pi es
the sam e pos ition as the King under th e
En glish Con stitutio n. He is the h ea d of the
State but not of th e Execu ti ve. He rep rese nts
the nation but does not rule the nat io n. He
is the symb ol of the nation . His place in
ad min istration is that of a ce rem on ial dev ice
or a sea l by which th e na tio n 's decisio ns a re
made kn owll . He is generally bound by the
advice of his ministers. He ca n do nothillg
contrary to th eir advice n or can he do anyth ing without their advice. The Pres ide n t of
the United States ca n dism iss any secretary at
any tim e. Th e President of th e Indi an Uni on
has no power to do so, so lon g as hi s ministers
co mmand a majority in Parli amen t".
In estimati n g th e constitution al pos itio n
of the Pres ident, particul ar referen ce h as to
be made to the provisions of Articles 53, 74
and 75. These are:
1. Th e executive power of the Un ion sh a ll
b e vested in Pres ide n t an d sha]] be
exe rcised by hi m/her either directly or
through office rs subordina te to him / her
in accorda n ce with this Cons titutio n
(Arti cle 53).
2 . Th ere shall be a cou ncil of m inisters with
the Prime Minister at the head to aid
and advise th e P resident who 'shall ', in
the exercise of his/her functions, act in
accordance with such advice (Article 74) .
3. Th e counci l of mini ste rs shaH be co llectively respon sibl e to th e Lok Sab ha
(A rticle 75). Thi s prov isioll is th e fo undati on of th c parlia mentary system of
govern men t.
Th e 4 2nd Const itu t iona l Ame n dment
Act of 1976 (enacted by th e Indira Gandh i
Governm ent) made the President b ou nd by

the advice of the co uncil of mi nisters hea ded
by the Pri me Minister 16 • The 44th Co nstitutiona1 A.me ndment Act of 1978 (enacted by the
Janata Party Governmen t h eaded by Morarj i
Desa i) au th orised the Presiden t to require the
counc il of m in isters to reconsider such advice
either generall y or otherwise. However, he/
she 'shall' act in acco rdan ce with the advice
tendered after such reco nsideration. In other
wo rds, th e President may return a m atter o nce
fo r reconsideratio n of hi s/her mi nisters, but
the recon sidered advice shall be binding.
In October 1997, the cab inet reco mm ended
Pres ident K.R Narayanan to impose President's
Rule (un der Article 356) in Uttar Pradesh. The
President returned the matte r for the reco nsideration of the cab i net, whic h then decided
not to move ahead in th e matter. Hen ce, the
BJP-Ied governmen t under Kalyan Singh was
saved. Again in September 1998. the Pres ide n t
KR Naraya nan return ed a recomm endation
of the cab inet that sought the imposition of
the Preside nt's Rule in Bi har. After a coupl e
of months, the cabi net re-advised the sam e.
It was only then tha t the Presiden t's Ru le was
imposed in Bih ar, in February 1999.
Th ough the President has 110 constitutio nal
discretion, he / she has some situationa l discretion. In other words, the Preside nt call act
on h is/ h er d iscretio n (that is, witho ut the
advice of the m in isters) under th e fo llowi ng
situations:
(i) Appoi n tmen t of Prime Min ister when
no party has a clear m ajority in the
Lo k Sab ha or whe n the Prime Minister
in office dies suddenly a nd th ere is no
obvio us successor.
(ii) Dismissal of the counc il of mini sters
wh en it can not prove the confi dence of
the Lok Sabha.
(iii) Dissolu tion of th e Lok Sab ha if the council of min isters has lost its maj or ity.
the origina l Constitu ti on, t here was no such
specific provision in Article 74.

16 1n

President

Table 18.3

~ 201

Articles Related to President at a Glance

Article No

Subject-matter

52 .

The President of India

53.

Executive power of the Union

54 .

Election of President

55.

Manner of election of President

56.

Term of office of President

57.

Eligibility for re-election

58.

Qualifications for election as President

59.

Conditions of President's office

60.

Oath or affirmation by the President

61 .

Procedure for impeachment of the President

62.

Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of President

65.

Vice-President to act as President or to discharge his functions

71.

Matters relating to the election of President

72.

Power of President to grant pardons etc., and to suspend, remit or commute sentences In certain cases

74 ,

Council of ministers to aid and advise the President

75.

Other provisions as to ministers like appointment, term, salaries, etc.

76.

Attorney-General of India

77.

Conduct of business of the Government of India

78.

Duties of Prime Minister in respect to furni shing of Information to the President, etc.

85.

Sessions of Parliament, prorogation and dissolution

111.

Assent to bills passed by the Parliament

112.

Union Budget (annual financial statement)

123.

Power of President to promulgate ordinances

143.

Power of President to consult Sup~,~
e~
m~
e_C
~o
~u
~"
,,-_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _~_ _ _..

Table 18.4
51 No

Presidential Election, 2022 (Value of Votes of elected MLAs and MPS)17
NAME OF STATEI
UNION TERRITORY

NUMBER OF
ASSEMBLY
SEATS
(ELECTIVE)

POPULATION
11971 CENSUS)

VALUE OF VOTE
OF EACH M L A

TOTAL VALUE
OF VOTES FOR
THE STATE

ANDHRA PRADESH

175

27800586

159

159 " 175 = 27825

2

ARUNACHAL PRADESH

60

467511

8

008 " 060 :;: 480

3

ASSAM

126

14625152

116

116" 126 = 14616

I 4

BIHAR

243

42126236

173

173 " 243 :;: 42039

5

CHHATTISGARH

90

11637494

129

129" 090 '" 11610

6

GOA

40

795120

20

020 " 040 = 800
(Contd.)

I?This information is obtained from the official website of the Election Commission of India.

202
SI. No.

fJ

\

Indian Polity

NAME OF STATEI
UNION TERRITORY

NUMBER OF
ASSEMBLY

POPULATION
(1971 CENSUS)

VALUE OF VOTE
OF EACH M.L.A.

TOTAL VALUE
OF VOTES FOR

SEATS

THE STATE

(elECTIVE)

7

GUJARAT

182

26697475

147

147)( 182 = 26754

8

HARYANA

90

10036808

112

112 x 090= 10080

9

HIMACHAL PRADESH

68

346043 4

51

051 )< 068 = 3468

10

JHARKHAND

81

14227133

176

176 x 081 =14256

11

KARNATAKA

224

29299014

131

131 "224=2934 4

12

KERALA

140

21347375

t52

152 x 140 = 21280

13

MADHYA PRADESH

230

30016625

131

131 ><230=30130

14

MAHARASHTRA

288

50412235

175

118 x 288" 50400

15

MANIPUR

60

1072753

18

018)( 060 '" 1080

16

MEGHALAYA

60

1011699

17

017 x 060 = 1020

17

MIZORAM

40

332390

8

008 " 040 = 320

18

NAGALAND

60

516449

9

009 x 060 = 540

19

ODI$HA

147

21944615

149

149" 147 = 21903

20

PUNJAB

117

13551060

116

116 :0: 117'"' 13572

21

RAJASTHAN

200

25765806

129

129 )( 200 = 25800

22

SIKKIM

32

209843

7

007 x 032 = 224

23

TAMIL NADU

234

41199168

176

176" 234 = 41184

24

TELANGANA

119

15702122

132

132 x 119 = 15708

25

TR IPURA

60

1556342

26

026)< 060 =. 1560

26

UTIARAKHAND

70

4491239

64

064 )( 070

27

UTTAR PRADESH

403

83849905

208

208 )< 403 =. 83824

28

WEST BENGAl.

294

44312011

151

151 11294

29

NCT OF DELHI

70

4065698

58

30

UT O F PUDUCHERRY

30

471707

16

TOTAL

4033

54 ] 002005

=4060
016 030 =480

VALUE OF EACH VarE = 5,43,231 = 700
776
)
TO'I'AL
VALUE
OF
VarES
OF
B
776 MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT = 700 x 776 = 5,43,200
(C) TO'I'AL ELECTORS FOR THE
PRESIDENT ELECTION = MLAs (4033) + M.Ps (776) = 4809
(D) TO'I'AL VALUE OF VarES OF 4809 ELECfORS FOR
THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION 2022 = 5,43,231 + 5,43,200 = 10,86,431

L:

::c::::

•

=44394

058 )< 070

(A) VALUE OF EACH VarE OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT,
TO'I'AL MEMJlERS LOK SABHA (543) + RAJYA SABHA (233) = 776

e

=4480

II

= 543231



Vice-President

he Vice-President occupies the second
highest office in the country. Hel she is
accorded a rank next to the President
in the official warrant of precedence. This
office is modelled on the lines afthe American
Vice-President.

T

t ELECTION
The V,ice-President, like the President, is
elected not directly by the people but by
the method of indirect election. He/she is
elected by the members of an electoral college
consisting of the members of both Houses of
Parliament.' Thus, this electoral college is
different from the electoral college for the
election of the President in the following

two respects:
.
1. It consists of both elected and nominated
members of the Parliament (in the case
of president, only elected members).
2. It does not include the members of the
state legislative ass_e mblies (in the
case of President, the elected members
of the state legislative assemblies are
included). Explaining the reason for
this difference, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar
observed: 2

"The President is the head of the State
and his/her power extends both to the
IThe original Constitution provided that the VicePresident would be elected by the two Houses of
Parliament assembled at a joint meeting. This
cumbersome procedure was done away by the 11th
Constitutional Amendment Act of 1961.
2Cons rituen t Assembly Debates, Volume VII, p. 1001.

administration by the Centre as well as to
the states. Consequently, it is necessary
that in his/ her election, not only members of Parliament should play their part,
but the members of the state legislatures
should have a voice, But, when we come
to the Vice-President, his/ her normal
functions are to preside over the council
of states. It is only on a rare occasion,
and that too for a temporary period, that
he/she may be called upon to assume the
duties of the president. That being so, it
does not seem necessary that the members of the state legislatures should also
be invited to take part in the election of
the Vice-Presidene.
But, the manner of election is same in both
the cases. Thus, the Vice-President's election,
like that of the President's election, is held in
accordance with the system of proportional
representation by means of the single transferable vote and the voting is·by secret ballot.
All doubts and disputes in connection with
election of the Vice-President are inquired
into and decided by the Supreme Court whose
decision is final. The election of a person as
Vice-President cannot be challenged on the
ground that the electoral college was incomplete (i.e., existence of any vacancy among
the members of electoral college). If the election of a person as Vice-President is declared
void by the Supreme Court, acts done by him/
her before the date of such declaration ofthe
Supreme Court are not invalidated (Le., they
continue to remain in force).
The various vice-presidential elections held
so far are summarised in TItble 19.1.

204

P

Indian Polity

Table 19.1 Elections of the Vice-Presidents (1952-till now)
SI

Election

VlCtorrous

No of Votes

Runner -up

No of Votes

No

Year

Candidate

secured

Candidate

sec ured

1.

1952

Dr. S. Radhakrishnan

Unopposed

2.

1957

Dr. S. Radhakrlshnan

unopposeg

3.

1962

Dr. Zak!r Hussain

568

N. Samant Singh

14

4.

1967

V.V. Girl

486

Prof. Habib

192

5.

1969

G.S. Pathak

400

HV Kamath

156

6.

1974

B.D. JeUi

521

N.E. Horo

141

7.

1979

M. Hldayatullah

8.

1984

R. Venkataraman

9.

1987

Dr. Shankar Dayal Sharma

10.

1992

K.R. Narayanan

700

!(aka Joglnder Singh

01

11 .

1997

Krishna Kant

441

Surjeet Singh Barnala

273

12.

2002

B.S. Shekhawat

454

Shushll Kumar Shlnde

305

13.

2007

Mohd. Hamid Ansari

455

Najma Heptullah

222

14.

2012

Mohd. Hamid Ansari

490

Jaswant Singh

238

15.

2017

Venkaiah Naidu

516

Gopal Krishna Gandhi

244

16.

2022

Jagdeep Dhankar

528

Mar

ret Alve

182

QUALIFICATIONS, OATH
AND CONDITIONS
Qualifications
1b be eligible for election as Vice-President, a
person should fulfil the following qualifications:
1. He/she should be a citizen of lndia.
2. He/ she should have completed 35 years
of age.
3. He/ she should be qualified for election
as a member of the Rajya Sabha.
4. He/ she should not hold any office of
profit under the Union government
or any state government or any loca l
authority or any other public authority.
But, a sitting President or Vice-President of
the Union, the governor of any state and a minister for the Union or any state is not deemed
to hold any office of profit and hence qua li fied
for being a candidate for Vice-President.

Unopposed

508

B.C. Kambley

207

Unopposed

Further, the nomination of a candidate
for election to the office of Vice-President
must be subscribed by at least 20 electors as
proposers and 20 electo rs as seconders. Every
candidate has to make a security deposit of

't IS,OOO in the Reserve Bank of India.

3

Oath or Affirmation
Before entering upon his/her office, the
Vice-President has to make and subscribe to
an oath or affirmation. In his/ her oath, the
Vice-President swears:
1. To bear true faith and allegiance to the
Constitution of Ind ia; and
2. 1b faithful1y discharge the duties of h isI
her office.
3 Pres idential

and Vice-Presidential Elections Act,
1952 as amended in 1997.

Vice-President~, 205
The oath of office to th e Vice·P reside nt is
admin istered by the Presid ent or some person
appoi nted in that behal f by him / her.

Cond itions of Offic e
The Const itutio n lays down the following two
condi tion s of the Vice·P reside nt's office:
1. He/sh e should not be a m ember of either
House of Parlia ment or a House of the
state legisla ture. If a ny such person is
elected as the Vice·P reside nt, he/sh e is
deemed to have vacate d the seat in that
House on the date on which he /she
enters upon the office as Vice-President.
2. He/sh e should not hold any other office
of profit .

t TERM AND VACANCY
Term of Offic e
The Vice-President holds office for a tenn of
five years from the date on which he/ she enters
upon his/ her office. However, he/ she can resign
from his/ h er office at any time by addres sing
the resign ation letter to the Presid ent. He/ she
can also be removed from the office before
compl etion of his/ her tenn. A formal impeachm ent is not requir ed for hi s/ her removal. He/
she can be re moved by a resolu tion passed by a
major ity of all the then memb ers of the Rajya
Sabha and agreed to by the Lok Sabha. This
m eans that this resolu tion should be passed in
the Raj ya Sabha by an effective major ity and
in the 10k Sabha by a simple majority. Further,
this resolu tion ca n be introduced only in the
Rajya Sabha and not in the Lok Sabha. But, n o
such resolu tion can be moved unless at least 14
days' advan ce notice has been given. Notably,
no groun d has been menti oned in the Consti tution for his/ h er removal.
The Vice-P reside nt can hold office beyon d
hi s/h er term of five yea rs until hi s/ h er suc·
cessor assum es charge. He/ she is also eligib le
for re·ele ction to that office. He/sh e may be
elected for any numb er of terms. "
4Dr. S. Radha krishn an was elected for a seco nd term.

Vacancy in Offic e
A vaca ncy in th e Vice-P reside nt's office ca n
occur in any of the fo llowin g ways:
1. On th e ex piry of his/ her tenure of five
years
2. By his/h er resign ation
3. On hi s/ h er removal
4. By hi s/ h er deathS
5. Other wise, for examp le, when he/sh e
becom es disqua lified to hold office or
when hi s/h er electi o n is declared void.
When the vacan cy is going to be caused by
the expira tion of the term of the sitting vicepreSident, an electi on to fill the vacan cy must
be held befo re the expira tio n of the term.
If the office falls vacan t by resign ation,
removal, death or oth erwise, then electi on
to fill the vaca ncy should be h eld as soon as
possib le afte r the occur rence of th e vacancy.
The newly ·elect ed vice-p reside nt remai ns in
office for a full term of five years from the
date he/ she assum es ch arge of his/ her office.

t POWERS AND FUNCTIONS
The functions of the Vice-Preside nt are two-fo ld:
1. He/sh e acts as the ex-officio Chairm a n of
Rajya Sabha. In this capacity, hislhe r powers and fun ctions are si milar to those of
the Speaker of Lok Sabha. In this respec t,
he/ she resem bles th e Am erica n vicepresid ent, who also acts as the Chai nnan
of the Senat e-the Upper House of the
Amer ican legisla ture.
2. He/ she acts as Presid ent when a vacan cy
occurs in the office of the Presid ent due
to his/ h er resign ation, impea chme nt,
death or otherwise. 6 He/ she can act as
Presid ent only for a m aximu m period of
six month s within which a n ew Presid ent
has to be electe d. Further, when the sitting Presid ent is unabl e to di scha rge
5K.rishna Kant was the first Vice-P residen t to die in
office.
~Vhen two Presidents, Dr. Zakir Hussain and Fakrud din
Ali Ahmed, died in office, the then respective VicePresidents, V.V. Girl and B.D. Jatti acted as Preside nt

206 ,~ Indian Polity
hi s/ her fun ctions due to absence, illn ess
or any other ca use, the Vi ce-President
discharges his/ her fun ctions until the
Pres ident resum es his/ h e r office.7
While actin g as Pres ide nt or di scharging
the fun ction s of Preside nt, the Vi ce-Presiden t
does not pe rfo rm the duties of the offi ce of
th e chairman of Raj ya Sabha . During thi s
period, those duties are performed by the
Depu ty Cha irman of Rajya Sabha.
T he Co nstitution has not fixed a ny emoluments for the Vice-President in that ca pac ity.
He/ she draws his/ her regula r salary in hi s/
her ca pa city as the ex-officio Chairman of
the Raj ya Sa bha. In 2018, the Parliament
increased the sa la ry of the Cha irma n of th e
Raj ya Sabha from 't'1.2S lakh to 't'4 lakh per
month s. Earlie r in 2008, the pension of the
retired Vi ce-President was in crea se d from
't'20,000 pe r month to 50% of his/ her sala ry
pcr m onth 9 • In a ddition , he/ she is e nti tled
7T hc Vice-President, Dr. S. Radhakrishnan discharged
the fu nctions of the Presiden t in J une 1960, when
the then President Dr. Rajendra Prasad was on a
15-day tour to the USSR a nd aga in in July 1961, when
he/she (Dr. Rajendra Prasad) was very ill.
6 Yide the Fin an ce Act, 201 8, with effect from 1st
January, 201 6. T his Act amended the Salaries and
Allowa nces of Officers of Parliament Act, 1953.
~e Yice-President's Pension (Amendment) Act,
2008. This Act amended the Yice-President's Pension
Act, 1997.

to dail y allowance, free furni shed res iden ce,
medica l, trave l a nd othe r fa ciliti es.
During a ny period wh en the Vice-President
acts as Preside nt or discha rges th e functi o ns
of the Pres ide nt, he/ she is not e ntitled to the
salary or allowance payable to th e Chairm a n
of Raj ya Sabha, but th e salary and a llowa nce
of th e Preside nt.

INDIAN AND AMERICAN VICEPRESIDENTS COMPARED
Though the offi ce of the Indian Vice-Pres ident
is modell ed on th ~ lines of the Ame rican
Vice-P reside nt, there is a diffe ren ce. The
Ameri can Vice-Preside nt succeeds to the
presiden cy when it fa ll s vaca nt, and remains
Pres ident for the unex pired te rm of his/ her
predecessor. T he India n Vice-P res ident, on
the other hand, does not assum e t he offi ce
of th e Pres ide nt whe n it falls vaca nt for th e
un expired te rm . He/ she mere ly se rves as
an actin g Pres ident until the new President
assum es cha rge.
It is ev ident tha t t he Con stitution has
not ass igned any signifi ca nt functi on to th e
Vice-Pres ide nt in tha t capaci ty. Hence, so me
schola rs ca ll him / her 'Hi s Supe rfluou s Highn ess'. This offi ce was c reated with a view
to mainta in th e politi cal continuity of the
Indian Sta te.

Table 19.2

Articles Related to Vice-President at a Glance

Article No.

Subject-matter

63.

The Vice-Presiden t of India

64.

The Vice-President to be ex-officio Chairman of the Council of States

65.

The Vice-President to act as President or to disch arge his/her functions during casual vacancies In the
offi ce. or during the absence, of President

66.

Election of Vice-President

67.

Term of office of Vice-President

68.

Time of holding election to fill vacancy In the offiCe of Vice-President and the term of office of person
elected to fill casual vacancy

69.

Oath or affirma tion by the Vice-President

70.

Discharge of President's functions In other contingencies

7 1.

Matters relating to, or connected with, the election of Vice-Presid ent

CHAPTER

n the schem e of parlia menta ry system of
gover nmen t provid ed by th e consti tution ,
the Presid ent is the nomin al execu tive
autho rity (de jure execu tive) and Prime Minister is the real execu tive autho rity (de facto
execu tive). In other words, Presid ent is the
head of the State while Prime Minis ter is the
head of the gover nmen t.

I

APPO INTM ENT OF THE PRIME
MINISTER
The Cons titutio n does not conta in any
specif ic proce dure for the select ion and
appoi ntmen t of the Prime Minis ter. Articl e
75 says only thafth e Prime Minis ter shall be
appoi nted by the Presid ent. However, this does
not imply that the Presid ent is free to appoi nt
anyon e as the Prime Minis ter. In accord ance
with the conve ntions of the parlia menta ry
system of gover nment , the Presid ent has to
appoi nt the leader of the major ity party in
the Lok Sabha as the Prime Minis ter. But,
when no party has a clear major ity in the Lok
Sabha, then the Presid ent may exerci se his/
her perso nal discre tion in the select ion and
appoi ntmen t of the Prime Minis ter. In such
a Situat ion, the Presid ent usuall y appoi nts
the leader of the larges t party or coalit ion
in the Lok Sabha as the Prime Minis ter and
asks him/ her to seek a vote of confid ence in
the House within a month . This discre tion
was exerci sed by the Presid ent, for the first
time in 1979, when Nee1am Sanjiv a Reddy
(the then Presid ent) appoi nted Chara n Singh
(the coalit ion leader ) as the Prime Minis ter

Prime Minister

after the fall of the Janat a Party gover nmen t
h eaded by Morar ji Desai.
There ·is also one more situat ion when
the Presid ent may have to exerci se his/ her
indivi dual judge ment in the select ion and
appoi ntme nt of the Prime Minis ter, that
is, when the Prime Minis ter in office dies
sudde nly and there is no obvio us successor.
This is what happe ned when Indira Gandh i
was assass inated in 1984. The then Presid ent
Zail Singh appoi nted Rajiv Gandh i as the
Prime Minis ter by ignor ing the prece dent
of appoi nting a careta ker Prime Minis ter. l
Later on, the Congr ess parlia menta ry party
unani mous ly electe d him as its leader . However, if, on the death of an incum bent Prime
Minis ter, the ruling party elects a new leader,
the Presid ent has no choic e but to appoi nt
him / her as Prime Minis ter.
In 1980, the Delhi High Court held that the
Const itution does not requir e that a person
must prove hislhe r major ity in the 10k Sabha
before he/sh e is appoi nted as the Prime Minister. The Presid ent may first appoi nt himlh er
as the Prime Minis ter and then ask himlh er to
prove his major ity in the Lok Sabha within a
reason able period . For example, Chara n Singh
(1979), V.P. Singh (1989), Chand rasekh ar (1990),
IOn the death oC Jawaharlal Nehru and Lal Bahadur
Shastri when the leadership was contested, the President made tempor ary arrangements by appoin ting
the senion nost minister as the Prime Minister, until
the Connal election of the leader by the party. Both
the times, it was Gulzari Lal Nanda who acted as the
Prime Minister.

208

P

Indian Polity

L~V. Narasi mha Ra.o ( 1991), A.B. Vaj yapce (1996),

Deve Gowda ( 1996), LK. Guj ra l ( 1997) and again

A.B. Vajpayee (1998) were appointed as Prime
Min isters in th is way.
In 1997, th e Sup re m e Co urt he ld t hat a
pe rson who is n ot a mem be r of e ither I-louse
o f Parl ia ment can be appo in ted as Prim e
Min ister for six mon th s, within wh ich , he!
she sh ould beco me a member of e ith er House
of Parli ame nt; otherw ise, he/ she ceases to be
the Prim e Mini ste r.
Const itutiona lly, the Prim e Min iste r may
be a me mber of any of the two Houses of pa rliame nt. For example, th ree Prim e Min isters,
Indi ra Gandhi (1966), Ocve Gowda (1 996) and
Manmoha n Singh (2004), were m embers of the
Rajya Sabha. In Brita in, o n the other hand, the
Prime Min ister shou ld defi nitely be a member
of the Lower House (House of Commons).

t OATH , TERM AND SALARY
Before the Prim e Minister enters upon his/ he r
office, the President admini sters to him/ her the
oaths of office and secrecy.2 In hi s/ her oath of
office, the Prime Mini ster swea rs:
1. to bear tru e fa ith and a ll eg ia nce to th e
Co nstitution of Indi a ,
2 . to uphold the sove re ignty and in tegrity
of Ind ia,
3. to fa ith full y a n d con scie nti o usl y di scharge th e duti es of hi s/ he r office, an d
4 . to do right to a ll manner of peo pl e in
accorda nce with the Co nstitution a nd
t he law, without fear o r favour, affection
or ill will.
I n hi s/ h e r oath of se c recy, t h e Prim e
Mini ste r swea rs that he/ she wi ll not directl y
o r indirectl y com muni ca te or revea l to a ny
perso n (s) any matter that is b ro ugh t under
hi s/ her co nsideration or becomes known to
him / her as a Uni o n Min ister exce pt as may
b e required fo r the due di scharge of hi s/ h er
duti es as such mini ster.
Th e term of the Prime Minister is not fi xed
an d he / she holds office durin g t he pleasure
of th e President. However, t h is does not mean
4'he fonn of oa th of office and secrecy for the Prime
Mini ster is sim il ar to that fo r any Uni on ministe r.

t ha t th e Pres id e n t can di sm iss the Prime
Mi ni ste r at a ny tim e. So lo ng as the Prime
Min iste r e njoys t he majority suppo rt in the
Lok Sa bha, he / she can n ot be dismi ssed by
the Pres ident. Howeve r, if he/ sh e loses the
co nfide nce of the Lok Sabha , he / she must
resign or t he President ca n dismi ss him / hcr. 3
T he sa la ry a nd a llowances of th e P rim e
Min ister are de termined by th e Parliame nt
from tim e to time 311 . He / she gets the sa lary
a nd a ll owances tha t are payabl e to a membe r
o f Parli a m e nt. Additiona ll y, h e / she gets a
sumptuary a ll owance, free a ccommodation,
t ravelling a ll owance, medica l fa ciliti es, etc. In
2001 , the Parliame nt in creased the sum ptuary
3b
a llowance from tl ,500 to t3 ,000 per month •

POWERS AND FUNCTIONS
OF THE PRIME MINISTER
The powers a nd fun ction s of Prime Mini ster
can be studied und er th e fo ll owi ng heads:

In Relation to Council of Ministers
The Prime Mini ster enjoys th e fo ll owing powe rs as h ead of t he Uni o n counc il of ministers:
1 . He/ she reco mmends persons who can be
appointed as ministe rs by t he Preside n t.
Th e Preside nt ca n appo in t on ly t hose
perso n s as mini ste rs who are recommended by th e Prime Mi n ister.
2. He/ sh e a llocates and reshuffles various
portfolios a m ong the mini sters.
3. He/ sh e ca n ask a mini ster to res ign or
a dvise the President to di s m iss him / her
in case of differe nce of op ini on.
4 . He / she pres ides ove r t he meet in g of
coun c il of ministe rs a nd influen ces its
deci sions.
s. He/ she gui des, directs, co ntro ls, and coordina tes the activ ities of all the ministe rs.
J ror example, V. P. Si ngh in 1990 and Deve Gowda in
1997 resigned after defeat in the Lok Sabha .
JaThe Sa laries a nd Allowances of Mi nisters Act,
1952, has been passed for thi s purpose.
Jb.y-hc Salaries and Allowan ces of Mini sters (Amend·
ment) Act, 2001 .

Prime Minister

6. Helshe can bring about the collapse of
the council of ministers by resigning
from office.
Since the Prime Minister stands at the
head of the council of ministers, the other
ministers cannot function when the Prime
Minister resigns or dies. In other words, the
resignation or death of an incumbent Prim,e
Minister automatically dissolves the councIl
of ministers and thereby generates a vacuum.
The resignation or death of any other minister, on the other hand. merely creates a
vacancy which the Prime Minister mayor
may not like to filL

In Relation to the President

,

The Prime Minister enjoys the following
powers in relation to the President:
1. Helshe is the principal channel of communication between the President and
the council of ministers. 4 It is the duty
of the prime minister:
(a ) to communicate to th~ Presi~e?t all
decisions of the counCIl of ministers
relating to the administration of the
affairs of the Union and proposals
for legislation;
(b) to furnish such information relating
to the administration of the affairs
of the Union and proposals for legislation as the President may call for;

and

,

"

\

,
(

( c) if the President so requires, to submit for the consideration of the
council of ministers any matter on
which a decision has been taken by
a minister but which has not been
considered by the council.
2. He/she advises the President with regard
to the appointment of important officials like attorney general of India,
Comptroller and Auditor General of
India , chairman and members of the
.
UPSC, election commissioners, chairman and members of the finance commission and so on.
4Article 78 specifically deals with this function of
the Prime Minister.

~, 209

In Relation to Parliament
The Prime Minister is the leader of the Lower
House. In this capacity, he/ she enjoys the
following powers:
1. He/ she advises the President with regard
to summoning and proroguing of the
sessions of the Parliament.
2. He/she can recommend dissolution of the
Lok Sabha to President at any time.
3. He/she announces government policies
on the floor of the House.

Other Powers &- Functions
In addition to the above-mentioned three
major roles, the Prime Minister has various
other roles. These are:
1. He/ she is the chairman of the NITI
Aayog (which succeeded the plann.ing
commiSSion), National Integrahon
Council, Inter-State Council, National
Water Resources Council and some other
bodies.
2. He/ she 'plays a significant role in shaping
the foreign policy of the country.
3 . He/ she is the chief spokesman of the
Union government.
4. He/ she is the crisis manager-in-chief at
the political level during emergencies.
5. As a leader of the nation, he/ she meets
various sections of people in different
states and receives memoranda from
them regarding their problems, and
so on.
6. He/ she is leader of the party in power.
7. He/ she is political head of the services.
Thus, the Prime Minister plays a very
significant and highly crucial role in the
politico-administrative system of the country.
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar stated, 'If any functionary
under our constitution is to be compared with
the us President, he is the Prime Minister
and not the President of the Union'.

~ ROLE DESCRIPTIONS
The various comments made by the eminent
political scientists and constitutional experts
on the role of Prime Minister in Britain holds

210 ,~,ndian Polity
good in the Indian context also. These are
me ntioned below:
Lord Morely He described Prim e Mini ster
as 'p r imus inter pares' (first amo ng equa ls)
and 'key stone of the cabine t arch'. He sa id ,
"Th e head of the cabi net is 'primus i nter
pares', and occupied a position which so long
as it lasts, is one of excep tional and pecu li ar
authority".
Herbert Marrison ~As the h ead of the
Governme nt, he (prim e minister) is 'primus
intcr pares'. But, it is today for too modest an appreciation of the Prime Minister's
position ".
Sir William Vernor Harcourt He described
Prime Min ister as 'inter stella s luna minores'
(a moon among lesse r stars).
Jennings ~Hc is, rather, a sun aro und which
planets revolve. He is t he key-sto ne of the
const itution . All roads in the co nstitu tion
lead to the Prime Minister."
H .J . Laski On the relationship between the
Prime Minister and t he cab in et, he sai d that
the Prime Minister ~is centra l to its formation, ce ntral to its life, and ce n tra l to its
death". He described him as ~t h e pivot a round
wh ich t he entire governmenta l machinery
revolves."
H . R. G. Greaves "The Government is the
master of the country and he (Prime Min ister)
is the ma ster of the Government."
Munro He ca lled Prim e Minister as ~the
ca ptain of the ship of the state".
Ramsay Muir He described Prim e Mini ste r
as "the steersma n of steering wheel of the
shi p of the state."
The role of the Prim e Minister in the
British parl iamentary government is so
sign ifi ca nt and crucia l that observers like
to ca ll it a 'Prime Ministerial gove rnm e n t.'
Thus , R.H. Crossman says, 'The post-war
epoch has been the final transforma ti o n of
ca binet governm e nt into Prime Ministerial

government.' Simil arly, Humphrey Berkely
points out, 'Parl iame n t is not, in practice,
sove reign. The parliam e ntary democ racy
ha s n ow collapsed at Westm i nster. The basic
defect in the British syste m o f govern in g is
the super-mini ste rial powe rs of th e Prim e
Minister: The sa me desc ripti on holds good
to t he Indian context too.

RELATIONSHIP WITH
THE PRESIDENT
The fo llowing provisions of the Co nstitution
dea l with the relationship between the President a nd the Prim e Minister:

l. Article 74 There shall be a cou nc il of
ministe rs with the Prim e Minister at the
head to aid and advise the President who
shall, in the exercise of hi s/ h er functions,
act in accordan ce with suc h advice. Howeve r,
the President may requ ire t he counc il of
mini sters to reconsider suc h advice and t he
President shall act in accordance with the
advice tendered after such reco nsideration.
2. Article 75 (a) The Prim e Minister shall
be appointed by the President an d the othe r
mini sters shall be appointed by the Preside nt
on t he advice of the Prim e Mi ni ster; (b) The
ministers sha ll hold office during the pleasu re of the President; and (c) The council of
mini sters sha ll be co ll ectivel y respon sible to
the House of t he People.
3. Article 78 It sha 11 be t he duty of th e
Prime Ministe r:
(a) to com muni cate to the President all decisions of the council of ministers relating
to the administration of the affairs of
the Unio n a nd proposa ls for legislatio n;
(b) to furnish such information relating to
the ad ministration of the affairs of the
Un ion and proposa ls for legi slation as
the President may ca ll for; and
(c) if the President so requi res, to submit for
the co nsideration of the cou ncil of ministers any matter on wh ich a decis ion
has been taken by a mini ster but which
ha s not been conside red by the cou nc il.

Prime Minister

CHIE F MINISTERS WHO BECAME
PRIME MINISTERS .
Six peopl e-Mo rarji Desai, Chara n Singh , V.P.
Singh , P.V. Naras imha Rao, H.D. Deve Gowda
and Naren dra Modi -beca me Prime Minis ters
after being Chief Minis ters of their respective States. Morar ji Desai, Chief Minis ter of
the erstwh ile Bomb ay State during 1952-5 6.
becam e the first non-C ongress Prime Minis ter
in March 1977. Chara n Singh, who succeeded
him, was the Chief Minis te r of the undivided Uttar Prade sh in 1967-1 968 and again
in 1970. V.P. Singh , also from U.P., becam e
Prime Minis ter in the short lived Nation al
Front gover nment (Dece mber 1989-Novemb er
1990). P.V. Naras imha Rao, the first Prime
Minis ter from South India, who held the post
from 199.1-1996, was Chief Minis ter of Andhr a
Prade sh betwe en 1971-1 973. H.D. Deve Gowda
was Chief Minis ter of Karna taka when he was
chose n to lea d the Unite d Front gover nmen t
in June 19965 .
Naren dra M<:>di (BJP) was the Chief Minis ter
of Gujara t when he becam e ~e Prime Minis ter
in May 2014. He served as the Chief Minis ter
of Gujar at for four times during 2001 to 2014.

t CARETAKER GOVERNMENT
The Const itution of India does not conta in
any provis ion for a careta ker gover nmen t.
It is only a situat ional arrang em ent and a"
fun ctiona l neces sity.

Meaning
The follow ing points clearl y doing out the
mean ing of a ca retake r gover nment :
1. The creati on of a ca retake r gover nmen t
after the dissol ution of the popul ar
chamb e r of the Parlia ment and its terminat ion with the induc tion of a new
minis try after the gener al electi on is an
essent ial featur e of the parlia menta ry
system of gover nm e nt in opera tion.
~e Hindu , April 6, 2009.

~ 211

Such a govern ment is enjoin ed upon to
hold free and fair poUs so that a n ew
popul ar gover nmen t co mes into being6 .
2. The term (caret aker gover nmen t) has
come to be used in co mmon parlan ce to
descri be the status of a coun cil of ministers that has resign ed on havin g lost
the confid ence of the Lok Sabha or othe rwi se but is asked by the Presid ent to
contin ue till altern ative arrang emen ts
are made . If an altern ative gover nment canno t be forme d imme diatel y
and gener al electi ons have to be held,
the outgo ing counc il of minis ters may
h ave to hold charg e till the co nclu ~
sion of electi ons and forma tion of new
gover nmen t'.

Limited Role
Unlik e a regula r gover nmen t, a careta ker
gover nmen t is mean t for only manag ing the
routin e a ctiviti es of the gover nment . He nce,
it is not expec ted to make any Signif ica nt
policy decisi ons or initia te new measu res
and schem es excep t those relatin g to nation al
securi ty or nation al intere st.
The follow ing comm ents and observ ations
highli ght the limite d role of a careta ke r governme nt in the gover nan ce of the count ry:
I . The Thrku nde Comm ittee (1974 -75) recomme nded that a careta ker gover nmen t
should not: ( i) initi ate and annou nce
new polic ies, (ii) promi se or start new
projec ts, ( iii) grant allowa nces or loans,
salary increa ses, and (iv) hold officia l
functi ons attend ed by minis ters 8 •
6J .C.

Johari , Indian Gover nment and Policies,
Vishal Public ations, Volume II, Thirte enth Edition ,
2001, p. 729.
' Su bhash C. Kashyap, Our Consti tutio n, Nation al
Book 'frost, Fifth Edition , 2011, p. 203.
Bntis commi ttee on electoral refonn s was appoin ted
in 1974 by Jayapr akash Na rayan (J P) during his
"'Ibtal Revolution n movem ent. It was headed by
Justice Vithal Mahadeo Thrkunde. This unoffi cial
com mittee submit ted its report in 1975. It was also
known as J P Comm ittee.

212 ,~ Indian Pality
2. In August 1979, th e t he n Presiden t N.
Sa njeeva Reddy, whil e dissolvi ng th e Lok
Sabha, issued a communique stM ing that
t he Presiden t had co nsultation s with the
Prim e Min ister a n d so m e of hi s cabin et
co ll eagues who assured tha t:
(i) Elect io ns win b e peaceful , free a n d
fa ir. The rev isio n of th e e lectora l
ro l1 s will begin imm edi ately a nd
th e elect ion ti m e-tabl e wi ll commence in Nove mber 1979 a nd wi ll
be co mp leted by Decem be r 1979.
(ii) T he Gove rnm e n t will n ot ta ke deci s io n s du rin g thi s per iod whi c h
set nevI p oli c ies or in vo lve n ew
sp e n d i ng of a sig ni fica n t orde r
or co n stit u te m ea sures of adm in ist ra ti ve o r executive dec is io n s.
However, work of a n urge n t n ature
i n vo lvi n g t h e na ti o n a l in te rest
will n ot be h e ld up .
Table 20.1
Article No.

3, The Calcutta High Court in a j udgemen t
del ivered in December 1979 observed that
there is no mention of a ca retaker governmen t as such in O U f constitution , but such
a n extraordinary situa tion ca lls fo r a ca retaker governmen t a nd, therefore, the Prime
Min iste r and the Coun cil of Mi ni sters ca n ,
in such a situation only carryon day-today adm inistratio n in office, whi ch are
necessary for carrying on fo r the sake of
maki ng a n alternative arrangem en t.
4. Th e caretake r Prim e Mi ni sters a re co nstrai ned fo r two reaso n s: first, th e norma l cha nn el of acco un ta b ili ty through
Parl iamen t does not exist; seco nd, th e
gove rnm en t does not ab use its position
to ga in e lectoral adva n tage 9 ,
9Rajeev Dhavan, Caretaker Despotism: Is the Pres ident Meddl ing? T he Sun day Times o f Ind ia, New
Delh i, August 15, 1999, p . 16.

Articles Related to Prime Minister at a Glance
Subject Matter

74.

Council of Ministers to aid and advise President

75.

Other provisions as to Ministers

77.

Conduct of business of the Government of India

78.

Duties of Prime Minister as respects the furnishing of information to the President, etc.

88.

Rights of Ministers as respects the Houses

CHAPTB, ill

21

A

s the Constitution of India provides
for a parliamentary system of govern·
m en t modelled on the British patte rn ,
the counc il of ministers headed by the prim e
minister is the real executive a uthority is our
politico.admini strative system .
The principles of parliamentary system of
government are not detailed in the Constitution ,
but two Articles (74 and 75) deal with them in
a broad, sketchy and general manner. Article 74
deals with the status of the council of ministers
wh ile Artic1e 75 deals with the appointment,
tenure, responsibility, qua lification, oath and
salaries and alJowances of the ministers.

t CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 74-Council of Ministers to aid
and advise President

1. There shall be a Council of Ministers with
the Prime Minister at the head to aid and
advise the President who sha11, in the exercise ofhislher fun ctions, act in accordance
with such advice. However, the President
may require the Council of Ministers to
recon.side r such advice and the Presiden t
shall act in accordance with the advice
tendered after such reconsideration.
2. The a dvi ce tende red by Ministers to t he
Presiden t sha ll n ot be inquired in to in
a ny court.

Article 75-0ther Provisions
as to Min isters
1. Th e Prime Mini ste r sh all be appo inted

by th e Presiden t a nd the other Ministers

Central Council of
Ministers

shall be appointed by the Preside nt on
th e a dvice of the Prime Minister.
2. The total number of ministers, in cludin g the Prime Minister, in the Coun cil
of Ministers shall not exceed 15% of
t h e tota l strength of th e Lok Sabha.
Thi s provision was added by the 91st
Am e ndm ent Act of 2003.
3. A m ember of e ither house of Pa rli a me nt
belon ging to a n y poli tical p a rty wh o
is di squa lified on t he ground of de fecti o n sh a ll a lso b e di squ alifi e d to be
a ppoin ted as a mini ste r. T h is p rov ision
was a lso a dde d by th e gIst Am e n dm e n t
Act of 2003.
4. The ministers shall hold office during the
pleasure of the Pres ident.
5. The council of ministers sh all be col1 ectively respon sibl e to th e Lok Sabha.
6. The Presiden t sha ll a dminister the oaths
of office and secrecy to a min iste r.
7. A minister who is n ot a m ember of t he
Pa rliam ent (either hou se) for any period
of six co n secuti ve mon t hs sha ll cease to
be a minister.
8. T he salaries and a ll owan ces of mi ni sters
sha ll be determined by the Parliamen t.

Art icle 77- Conduct of Business
of the Government of India
1. All executive action of the Governme nt of
India sh a ll b e expressed to be taken in
the n a m e of the Presiden t.
2. Orders a nd other instrumen ts m ade and
executed in the n ame of the Presiden t
sh a ll be a uthenticated in such ma nn e r

214 ,r(I,nd ian Polity
as may be specif ied in rul es to be made
by the Presid ent. Furth e r, t he va li dity
of an order or instru m e nt whi ch is so
authe n ticate d shall no t he call ed in
qu es tio n o n the groun d that it is not a n
o rd er o r in strum ent ma de o r execu t ed
by the Presid ent.
3 . The Pres ide n t shall m ake rules for th e
more co n ve nient transa ct ion of th e bu si·
ness of t he Gover nme nt of Indi a, and for
the a ll ocat ion a m ong Mini sters of th e
sa id bu siness.

Artic le 78-D uties of Prime Minis ter
It shall be th e du ty of the Prime Mini ste r

1. 1b comm unic., te to the Presid ent all deci-

sions of the Counc il of Minis ters relatin g
to the adm ini stratio n of the affairs of th e
Union and propo sals for legis la tion
2 . To furni sh s uch info rmat ion relatin g to
the ad minis tratio n of the affairs of the
Union a nd p roposa ls for leg islatio n as
th e Pres id e nt may call for
3. If the Presi dent so requir es, to s ubmit
for the co nsid era tion of the Cou nc il of
Mini sters a ny matte r on whic h a d ec ision has bee n taken by a Mini ster bu t
whi ch has not been cons id e red by the
Co un c il

Artic le 88--R ights of Minis ters as
Respe cts the Hous es
Eve ry mini ste r sha ll have the r ight to s peak
and take part in the proce eding s of ei ther
Hou se, a ny joint s itting of th e Ho uses a nd
any Co mmitt ee of Parli a ment of which he/
she may be nam ed a m e mber. But he/ she
shall not be entitle d to vote.

j

NATURE OF ADVICE
BY MINI STER S

Articl e 74 provid es for a counc il of mini sters
with the Prime Minis ter at the head to aid
a nd advise the Presid e n t in the exe rcise of
hi s/ her fu nc tion s. The 42 nd <l nd 44th Co nst itut ion a l Amen dmen t Acts have made the

1
a dvice bindin g o n th e Pres ide l1 t. Furthe r, the
nature o f advi ce tende red by mini sters to the
Presid ent ca nnot be enqui red by any co urt.
This provi sio n e mpha sises th e intim ate and
the confid ential relati onshi p betwe en the
Presid e nt <Ind the mini ste rs.
la
In V.N. R. Rao case ( 1971) , t he Supre m e
Court he ld that "eve n a fter t he dissol ution of
the Lok Sabha , the co uncil of mi n iste rs does
not cease to h o ld office. Articl e 74 is m a ndatory and, there fore, th e Presid ent ca nnot
exerc ise th e execu tive powe r witho ut the a id
a nd a dvi se of the co un cil of minis ters. Any
exerci se of execu tive power witho u t the aid
a nd advice will be un co nstitu tional as being
vio la ti ve o f Articl e 74~. Aga in in Sham sher
lb
Singh case (1974) , the court h eld that ~wher­
ever the Co nstitu tion requir es the sat isfa ction
of th e Pres ide nt, th e sat isfacti on is not the
perso nal sat isfacti o n of the Pres ide nt but it
is the sat isfacti on of the counc il of minis ters
with whose a id a nd on whose advice th e Presid ent exerc ises hi s / her power s and fuJ1 c tions ~.

t APPOINTMENT OF MINISTERS

The Prime Mini ster is appoi nted by the Presi·
dent, while the other minis ters <I re appoi nted
by the Pres iden t on the advice of the Prime
Mi niste r. This m ea ns that th e Pres ide nt ca n
appoi nt only those pe rsons as minis ters who
a re recom m ended by the Prime mini ster.
Usua lly, the me mbers of Parlia ment, either
Lok Sabha o r Rajya Sabha , are a ppoint ed as min·
isters. A person who is not a m ember of either
Ho use of Pa rli a m ent ca n a lso be appo inted
lThisArticle was amended by the 42nd Constitutiona l
Amend ment ACt of 1976 to the effect that the
preside ntshal l, in the exercise of his functio ns, act in
accord a nce with the advice rendered by the coun(:i1
of min isters. The 44th Constitutional Amendment
Act of 1978 fu rther added a proviso to this article
to the effect that the president may require the
counci l of ministers to reconsider such advice a nd
the preside nt shall act in accorda nce with the advice
tendered after such recons ideration.
laU.N.R. RlIO vs. Illdira GOlldl1i ( 1971).
lbSllllm sller Singh vs. Slate of PlIIljab ( 1974).

--__________________________________________________~C=e~n'~ro~I~C=ou=n~'="=o(~M
~m~"='e~nC_~
~0
as a minister. But, within six months, he/she
must become a member (either by election or
by nomination) of either House of Parliament,
otherwise, he/ she ceases to be a minister.
A minister who is a member of one House
of Parliament has the right to speak and to
take part in the proceedings of the other
House also, but he/ she can vote only in the
House of which he/ she is a member.

j

OATH AND SALARY
OF MINISTERS

Before a minister enters upon his/her office,
the President administers to him/her the
oaths of office and secrecy. In his/ her oath
of office, the minister swears:
1. to bear true faith and allegiance to the
Constitution of India,
2. to uphold the sovereignty and integrity
of India,
3. to faithfully and conscientiously discharge the duties of his/ her office, and
4. to do right to all manner of people in
accordance with the Constitution and
the law, without fear or favour, affection
or ill will.
In his/ her oath of secrecy, the minister swears that he/ she will not directly or
indirectly communicate or reveal to any
person(s) any matter that is brought under
his/ her consideration or becomes known to
him/her as a Union minister except as may
be required for the due discharge of his/ her
duties as such minister.
In ]990, the oath by Devi Lal as deputy
prime minister was challenged as being
unconstitutional as the Constitution provides
only for the Prime Minister and ministers.
The Supreme Court upheld the oath as valid
and stated that describing a person as Deputy
Prime Minister is descriptive only and such
description does not confer on him / her any
powers of Prime Minister. It ruled that the
description of a minister as Deputy Prime
Minister or any other type of minister such as
minister of state or deputy minister of which
there is no mention in the Constitution does

215

not vitiate the oath taken by him / her so long
as the substantive part of the oath is correct.
The salaries and allowances of ministers
are determined by Parliament from time to
2
time. A minister gets the salary and allowances that are payable to a member of Parliament. Additionally, he/ she gets a sumptuary
allowance (according to his/ her rank), free
accommodation, travelling allowance, medical facilities, etc. In 2001, the sumptuary
allowance for the prime minister was raised
from fl,SOO to ~3,OOO per month, for a cabinet
minister from ~1,000 to f2,000 per month, for
a minister of state from fSOO to f),OOO per
month and for a deputy minister from t300
to f600 per month 2a •

t RESPONSIBILITY OF MINISTERS
Collective Responsibility
The fundamental prinCiple underlying the
working of parliamentary system of government is the principle of collective responsibility. Article 75 clearly states that the council of
ministers is collectively responsible to the Lok
Sabha. This means that all the ministers own
joint responsibility to the Lok Sabha for all
their acts of om mission and commission. They
work as a team and swim or sink together.
When the Lok Sabha passes a no-confidence
motion against the council of ministers, all
the ministers have to resign including those
ministers who are from the Rajya Sabha. 3
Alternatively, the council of ministers can
advise the President to dissolve the Lok Sabha
on the ground that the House does not represent the views of the electorate faithfully and
call for fresh elections. The President may not
oblige the council of ministers that has lost the
confidence of the Lok Sabha.
l-yhe Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 1952,
has been passed for this purpose.
Z.' The Salaries and Allowances of Ministers (Amendment) Act, 2001.
3 Each minister need not resign separately; the resignation of the prime minister amounts to the resignation of the entire council of ministers.

216

,(J Ind;an PaUty

The principle of collective respo n sibility
a lso mea n s that the Cabi n et decis ions bind
a ll ca bin et ministers (a nd other ministers)
eve n if they differed in t he ca bin et meeti ng.
It is the duty of every m ini ster to sta nd by
ca bi net decisions and support the m both
wi thin a nd outside the Parl iament. If any
minister disagrees with a ca binet decision
and is not prepa red to defend it, h e / she
must res ign. Severa l ministers have resigned
in the pa st owi ng to theiT differences wit h
the cabinet. For exa mple, Dr. B.R. Ambed kar
res igned because of his differences with hi s
co ll eagu es on the Hindu Code Bill in 1953.
C. D. Deshmu kh resigned due to his d ifferences on the policy of reorgan isa tion of
sta tes. Arif Mo ha mmed resigned due to his
opposition to the Muslim Women (Protectio n
of Rights o n Divorce) Act, 1986.

Individual Responsibility
Article 75 a lso conta in s the prin ciple of
indi vidua l respon sibili ty. It states that the
m in isters hold office during th e pleasure
of t he President, whi c h m eans that the
Pres iden t can re move a minister eve n at a
t im e when th e cou nci l of ministers e njoys
th e co n fidence of the Lok Sab ha. However, the
President removes a ministe r onl y 011 the
advice of t h e Prim e Mini ster. In case of
a difference of opinion or dissati sfa ctio n
with the performan ce of a mini ste r, t h e
Prime Mini ster ca n ask him / h e r to resign
oradv ice t he President to dismiss him / h er.
By exerc is in g t hi s power, the Prime Mi niste r
can ensure the rea li satio n of the rule of collective respons ibil ity. in thi sco n text, Dr. B.R.
Am bcdka r obse rved:
"Collective responsibility ca n be achieved
on ly through the instrumentality of the
Prime Mi n ister. The refore, unless a nd
until we create that office a nd e ndow that
office with statutory a utho rity to nominate and dismiss ministers, t here ca n be
n o co llective respon sibility.""
~COllstirue"t Assembly Debates, Volume VIII , p. 1160.

No Legal Responsibility
In Britain, every order of the King tor a ny
public act is countersigned by a ministe r. If the
order is in violation of <lny law, t he minister
wo uld be he ld respo nsibl e and would be liable
in the court. The lega ll y accepted phra se in
Britain is, "The king ca n do no wrong." He nce,
he/ she ca nnot be sued in any co urt.
i n In dia, on the other hand , there is no
provision in the Cons ti tution for the syste m
of lega l respo nsib ili ty of a mini ster. It is n ot
req u ired that an order of the Preside nt for
a public act shou ld be countersigned by a
minister. Moreover, the courts are barred from
e nquiring into the nature of advice rendered
by t he mini ste rs to t he President.

COMPOSITION OF THE COUNCIL
OF MINISTERS
T he co un cil of min isters co nsists of three categories of mini sters, namel y, ca bin et ministe rs, ministers of state, and deputy ministers.
T he difference between t hem lies in their
respective ranks, emolume n ts, and po l itical
importa nce. At the top of a ll these m ini sters
stands the Prime Minister-the supreme governing authority of t he cou ntry.
At times, the cou ncil of mini sters may also
include a deputy prime mini ste r. The deputy
prime mini sters are appointed mostl y for
politi ca l rea sons.
The cabi n et m inisters head the important mini stries of the Ce ntra l govern ment
like home, defe nce, finance, externa l affai rs
an d so fo rth . Theyaremcmbersofthecab inet,attenditsmeetings and play an im portant
role in dec iding policies. Thus, their respons ibilities extend over the e ntire gamu t of
Central government.
The ministe rs of state can either be given
independent charge of min istries/ departments
or can be attached to cab inet mini sters. In
case of attach ment, they may e ith er be give n
the charge of departments of the ministries
headed by the cab in et mini sters or a ll otted
specific items of work re lated to the ministries headed by cab inet ministers. In both the

~ 217

Centrol Council of Ministers

cases, they work under the supervIsion and
guida nce as well as under the overa ll ch arge
and responsibility of the cabinet ministers. In
case of independent charge, they perform the
sa me functions and exercise the same powers
in relation to their ministri es/department~ as
cabinet mini sters do. However, they are not
members of the cabin et and do not attend
the cabinet 'meetings unless spec ially invited
when something related to their' mi nistries!
departmen ts are con sidered by the cabinet.
Next in rank are the dep uty , mini sters.
Th ey are not given independent charge of
ministries/ departments. They are attach ed

to the cab in et mini ste rs or ,ministers of state
and assist them in their adm inistrative, politi.
cal, and parli amentary duti es, They are not
members of the cabinet and do not attend
cabi net meetings. , ~
• _
that
It must also b~ mention ed here
,.
, there
"
is on e more category of ministers, ca n ed parliam en tary secretaries, Bu t, they are not the
members of th e co un cil of ministe rs, They
are appointed by the Prime Minister and not
by the PresidentS, They have no departm en t
5Study Repon o n Parliamentary Secretary, Minislry
of Parliamentary Affairs, 1997, p. 3 and p. 9,

•
Ta ble 21.1 Distinction Between Council of Ministers and Cabinet

I

I ,

CounCIl of mInisters

Cabmet

I' It is a wider body

1 It is a smaller body

2. It Includes all the three categories of ministers, that
is, cabinet ministers, ministers of state, and deputy
~ _~.I~ste rs .

• .a.

-

r

2. It Includes the cabinet ministers only. Thus, It is a
part of the council of ministers.

-

3. It does not meet, as a body, to transact government
business. It has no collective functions.

3. It meets, as a body, frequently and usually once In

4. It Is vested with all powers but In theory.

4. It exercises. In practice, the powers o f the council
o~ ministers and thus, acts for the latter.

Is

.

- ----

Its functions are determined by the cabinel

a week to deliberate and take decisions regarding
the transaction of government business. Thus, it
has collective functions.

S. It directs the council of ministers by taking policy
decisions which are binding on all ministers.

6. It Implements the decisions taken by the cabinet.

17. It is a constitutional body, dealt in detail by the Articles

6. It supervises the implementation of its decisions by
the council of ministers.

7. 11 was Inserted in Article 352 of the Constitution in
1978 by the 44th Constitutional Amendment Act.
Thus, it did not find a place in the original text of
are, however, not mentioned in the Constitution. Its size
the Constitution. Now also, Article 352 only defines
is determined by the prime minister according to the
exigencies of the time and requirements of the situation.
the cabinet saying that it is 'the council consisting
But, as provided by the 9 1st Constitutional Amendment
of the prime minister and other ministers of cabinet
Act of 2003, its maximum size should not exceed 15%
rank apPOinted under Article 75' and does not
of the total strength of the l ok Sabha. Its classification
describe its powers and functions. In other word s,
into a three-tier body Is based on the conventions of
11s role In our politico-administrative system is
parliamentary government as developed in Britain. It has,
based on the conventions of parliamentary governhowever, got a legislative sanction. Thus, the Salaries and
ment as developed in Britain.
Allowances of Ministers Act of 1952 defines a 'minister'
as a 'member of the council of ministers, by whatever
name called, and includes a deputy minister'.

I 74 and 75 of the Constitution. Its size and classification

I

8. It Is collectively responsible to the lower House of the
Parliament.

8. It enforce s the collective responSibility of the council of ministers to the l ower House of Parliament.

218

P

Indian Polity

under their contro l. They are attached to the
se n ior min isters and ass ist t hem in the disch arge of t he ir p arli a menta ry du ties.

1

COUNCIL OF MINISTERS
VSCABINET

T he words 'cou nc il of ministers' and 'cab inet'
are often used inte rcha ngea bly t hough there
is a defin ite d istinct ion between them. They
differ from each othe r in respects of co m position , funct ions, and role. These differences
arc shown in Thble 21.1.

t ROLE OF CABINET
1. It is the h ighest decision-making authority
in ou r politico-admi ni strative system.
2. It is t he chi ef po li cy formu lating body of
the Ce n tra l governm ent.
3. It is th e sup re m e exec utive authority of
th e Ce n tral government.
4. It is c h ief coo rdi n ator of Ce n tra l
a dm i n istra tio n.
5. It is a n advisory body to the Presiden t an d
its a dvice is b indi ng on h im / her.
6. It is th e chi ef cr is is manager and t hu s
deals with al1 e mergency situations.
7. It dea ls wi th all major leg islative and
financia l matters.
8. It exercises control over higher a ppointments like co nstitutiona l authorit ies and
se n ior secretariat ad mi nistrators.
9. It deals with a ll foreign po licies and fore ign affairs.

t ROLE DESCRIPTIONS
The va ri oll s co mm e n ts made by t he emi nent
politica l scientists a nd constitut io na l expe rts
on the ro le of cabinet in Bri tai n holds good
in the India n context a lso. T hese are m ent ioned below.
Ramsay Muir "The Ca b in et is t he steering
wheel of th e shi p of the state."
Lowell "The Cabi net is t he keystone o f th e
poli tical arc h".

Sir John Marriott "The Cab i net is the p ivot
aro und wh ich the whole pol it ica l mac h ine ry
revol ves".
Gladstone "Th e Cabinet is t h e so lar orb
aro ll nd wh ic h t he other bod ies revo lve".
Barker "The Cab in et is the magnet of poli cy".
Bagehot "The Cabinet is a hyphen that joins,
the buckle that bi nds the execut ive and legislative departme n ts togethe r".
Sir Ivor Jennings "The Cab ine t is t he core of
the British Co nstit utio na l System. It prov id es
un ity to the Bri t ish syste m of Govern me n t".
L.S. Amery "The Cabine t is the centra l
d irecting instrume n t of Govern men t".
T he positio n of th e Cabinet in th e British
Govern me n t has becomc so strong that Ra msay Muir referred to it as the 'D ictatorsh ip of
the Cab inet'. In hi s book 'How Britain is Governed', he wri tes ~A body wh ich wields such
powers as these may fai rl y be ' described as
'om n ipote nt ' in theory, howeve r, i ncapab le
it may be of us in g its om ni pote n ce. Its posi tion, whenever it com ma nds a majority, is a
dictatorship only qu a l ified by pU blicity. This
dictatorsh ip is far more abso lu te th at it was
two generat ions ago". T he same descript io n
hol ds good in the India n contex t too.

t KITCHEN CABINET
T he cabin ct, a sm a ll body cons isting of the
prime minister as its head an d the cabinet m inisters, is the highest decisio n-making body in
the forma l sense. However, a st ill sma ll er body
ca ll ed the 'Inner cab in et' or 'Kitche n Cab in et'
has become the real centre of power. This infor·
mal body consists of the Prime Minister and
a few influential co ll eagues in who111 he/ she
has faith and with whom he/ she can discuss
every problem . It advises t he prim e minister
on importan t po li tica l a n d a dmi n istra tive
issues and assists him / her in making crucia l
decisions. It is composed of not on ly cabinet
m inisters but a lso outsiders li ke fr iends a nd
fa mily mem bers ofthe prime minister.

Central Council of Ministers

\

\

Every prime minister in India has had his/
her 'Inner Cabinet'-a circle within a circle.
During the era of Indira Gandhi, the 'Inner
Cabinet' which came to be called the 'Kitchen
Cabinet' was particularly powerful.
The prime ministers have resorted to the
device of 'inner cabinet' (extra-constitutional
body) due to its merits, namely:
1. It being a small unit, is much more effi·
cient decision-making body than a large
cabinet.
2 . It can meet more often and deal with
business much more expeditiously than
the large cabinet.
3. It helps the Prime Minister in main·
taining secrecy in making decisions on
important political issues.
Table 21.2

\
I

I

Article No

~, 219

However, it has many demerits also. Thus,6
1. It reduces the authority and status of the
cabinet as the highest decision-making
body.
2 . It circumvents the legal process by
al10wing outside persons to play an
influential role in the government
functioning.
The phenomenon of 'kitchen cabinet'
(where decisions are cooked and placed
before the cabinet for formal approval) is
not unique to India. It also exists in USA and
Britain and is quite powerful in influencing
government decisions there.
6Avasthi and Avasthi, Indian Administration, Laksmi
Narain Agarwal , First Edition, 1993, p. 79.

Articles Related to Central Council of Ministers at a Glance
Subject Matter

74.

Council of Ministers to aid and advise President

75.

Other provisions as to Ministers

77.

Conduct of business of the Government of India

78.

Duties of Prime Minister as respects the furnishing of information to the President, etc.

88.

Rights of Min isters as respects the Houses

CHAPT.ER

22

Cabinet Committees

T

he Cabinet works through va riou s committees. These comm ittees are called
as Cab inet Committees. The features,
list a nd functions of these committees are
explained below.

j

FEATURES OF CABINET
COMMITTEES

The fol low i ng are the feat u res of Ca binet
Com mittees:

1. They are extra-constitutional in emergence.

In other words, they are not mentioned in
the Constitution. However, the Rules of
Business provide for their esta blishment.
2. They arc of two types-standing and ad
hoc. The former are of a permanent
nature while the latter are of a temporary nature. The ad 110C co mmittee s are
constituted from time to time to deal
with special problems. T h ey arc disbanded after their task is completed. l
3. They are set up by the Prime Minister
accordi ng to the exigencies of the time
and requirements of the situa tion.
Hen ce, their number, nomencla ture, and
composit ion varies from time to time.
4. Their membersh ip varies fro m one committee to anot h er committee. They
usuall y include on ly Cabinet Ministers.
Somet i mes, the non-cabi net min isters
can also be appointed as their m embers.
Further, t he non-cabinet m in iste rs can
a lso attend the meetings of the Cab in et
Committees as special invitees.
IFor exa mple, the Eme rgency Committee was SCI-UP

in 1962 after the Chinese invasion.

5 . They n ot on ly include the Min iste rs in
cha rge of subjects covered by them but
also include other se nior Ministers.
6. They are mostly headed by the Prime
Min ister. Some times other se nior Cabinet
Ministers a lso acts as the ir Chairman.
But, in case the Prime Min ister is a member of a comm ittee, helshe invariably
presides over it.
7. They n ot on ly sort out issues an d formul ate proposals for t he conside ration
of the Ca binet, but also take d ecisions.
Howeve r, the Ca bin et ca n review the ir
decisions.
8. They are an orga ni sat ional device to
reduce the enormous workload of the
Cabi net. They a lso facilitate in-depth
exa mination of policy issues and effect ive coo rdination. They are based on
the principles o f di visi on of labour and
effective delegation.

r LIST OF CABINET COMMITTEES
At present, the following 8 Cab inet Comm ittees are functional :
I. Cabi net Comm ittee on Politica l Affa irs
2. Ca bin et Com mittee o n Economic Affairs
3. Appo in tments Committee of the Cab inet
4. Cabin et Com mittee on Parl iamentary
Affa irs
5. Cabi net Committee on Security
6. Cab ine t Co mmittee on Accom modation
7. Cab inet Committee on Investme nt and
Growth
8 . Cabinet Committee on Employment and
Sk ill Develop m en t

Cabine; Committees

i

FUNCTIONS OF CABINET
COMMITTEES

1

1

1

-j

The following are the functions of the cabinet
committees:
1. The Cabinet Committee on Political
Affairs deals with all policy matters per·
taining to domestic and foreign affairs.
2. The Cabinet Committee on Economic
Affairs directs and coordinates the governmental activities in the economic sphere.
3. The Appointments Committee of the
Cabinet decides all higher level appointments in the Central Secretariat, Public
Enterprises, Banks and Financial
Institutions.
4. The Cabinet Committee on Parliamentary
Affairs looks after the ,progress of government business in the Parliament.
5. The Cabinet Committee on Security deals
\¥lth all issues relating to defence, law
'and order, internal security and atomic
energy·
.
6. The Cabinet Committee on Accomodation
deals with all issues regarding the allotment of government accomodatio'n to
the Memb~rs of Parliament, central
government employees, other persons
and various organisations,
7. The Cabinet Committee on Investment
a'n d Growth' deals with all policy matters
'a imed at accelerating capital inflows,
export promotion, import substitution
and improving ease of doing business,
8. The Cabinet Committee on Employment
and Skill Development deals with al1
'issues related to developing skills,
enhancing employability of workforce and increasing women workforce
participa~i0l!'

JI #

Of al1 the Cabiriet Committees, the most
powetful is the Political' Affairs ' Committee,
often described as a ~Super-Cabinet",

t GROUPS OF MINISTERS
t

\J

In addition to cabinet committees, several
Groups of Ministers (GoMs) are constituted
to look into different issues/subjects, Some of

~ 221

these GoMs are empowered to take decisions
on behalf of the Cabinet whereas the others
make recommendations to the Cabinet. 2
The institution of GoMs has become a
viable arid effective instrument of coordination among the 'ministries. These are ad hoc
bodies formed to give recommendations to
the cabinet on certain emergent issues and
critical problem areas, Ministers heading the
concerned ministries are inducted into the
relevant GoMs and when the advice is crystallised they are disbanded. 3
The Second Administrative Reforms Commission of India (2005-2009) made the following observations and recommendations
with respect to the working of the GoMs 4 :
1. The Commission observed that the constitution of a large number of GoMs has
resulted in many GoMs not being able
to meet regularly to complete their work
thus leading to significant delays on
many major i,s sues.
,
2. The Commission felt that more selective
use of the institution of GoMs would
,!_ pe~~aps.)ei;ld to ~ore ~ffective cqo!dination particularly if they are empowered to arrive at a .decision on behalf
of the Cabinet with time limits that
are prescribed for completing the work
entrusted to them.
3 . The Commission recommended that there
is need to ensure that the existing coordination mechanism of GoMs function
effectively and helps in early resolution
of issues, Selective, but effective use of
GoMs with clear mandate and prescribed
time limits would be helpful.
2Sccond Administrative Reforms Commission, Government of India, Report on. Organizational Structure of
Government of India, 2009, p. 136. This commission
was headed by Veerappa MoHy, a senior Congress
leader and former Karnataka Chief Minister. .
3Ramesh K. Arora and Rajni Goyal, Indian Public
Admil1istration, New Age International Publishers,
Third Edition, 2013, pp. 238-239.
4Second Administrative Reforms Commission ,
Government of Ind.ia, Report on Organisational
Structure of Government of India, 2009, pp. 136-137
and 140.

,

CHAPTER

23

T

he Parliament is the legislative organ
of the Union government. It occupies
a pre-eminent and central position
in the Indian democrati c political system
due to adoption of the parliamentary form
of government, also known as 'Westminster'
model of government I.
Articles 79 to 122 in Part V of the Constitution deal with the organisation, composition , duration , officers, procedures, privileges,
powers and so on of the Parliament.

t ORGANISATION OF PARLIAMENT
Under the Constitution, the Parliament of
India consists of three parts viz, the President, the Council of States and the House of
the People. In ]954, the Hindi names 'Rajya
Sabha' and 'Lok Sabha' were adopted by the
Council of States and the House of People
respectively. The Rajya Sabha is the Upper
House (Second Chamber or House of Elders)
and the Lok Sabha is the Lower House (First
Chamber or Popular House). The former represents the states and union territories of the
Indian Union, while the latter represents the
people of India as a whole.
Though the President of India is not a member of either House of Parliament and does not
sit in the Parliament to attend its meetings, he/
she is an integral part of the Parliament. A bill
passed by both the Houses of Parliament cannot
become law without the President's assent. He/
she also performs certain functions relating to
1Westminster is a place in London where the British

Parliament is located. It is often used as a symbol of
the British Parlia ment.

Parliament

the proceedings of the Parliament, for example,
he/ she summons and pro-rogues both the
Houses, dissolves the Lok Sabha, addresses both
the Houses, issues ordinances when they are
not in session, and so on.
In this respect, the framers of the Indian
Constitution relied on the British pattern
rather than the American pattern. In Britain,
the Parliament consists of the Crown (King
or Queen), the House of Lords (Upper House)
and the House of Commons (Lower House).
By contrast, the American President is not
an integral part of the legislature. In USA,
the legislature, which is known as Congress,
consists of the Senate (Upper House) and the
House of Representatives (Lower House).
The parliamentary form of government
emphasises on the interdependence between
the legislative and executive organs. Hence,
we have the 'President-in-Parliament' like
the 'Crown-in-Parliament' in Britain. The
Presidential form of government, on the other
hand, lays stress on the separation of legislative and executive organs. Hence, the American President is not regarded as a constituent
part of the Congress.

j

COMPOSITION OF THE
TWO HOUSES

Composition of Rajya Sabha
The maximum strength of the Rajya Sabha is
fixed at 250, out of which, 238 are to be the
representatives of the st;'1tes and union territories (elected indirectly) and 12 are nominated
by the President.

I
Parliament

At presen t, the Rajya Sabha has 245 members. Of these, 225 memb ers repres ent the
states, 8 memb ers repres ent the union territories and 12 memb ers are nomin ated by the
Presid ent.
The Fourth Sched ule of the Const itutio n
deals with the alloca tion of seats in the Rajya
Sabha to the states and union territo ries.
l. Repre sentat ion of States

The repres entatives of states in the Rajya Sabha are electe d
by the electe d memb ers of state legisla tive
assemblies. The electi on is held in accord ance
with the system of propo rtiona l repres entation by mean s of the single transf erable vote.
The seats are allotte d to the states in the Rajya
Sabha on th e basis of popul ation. Hence , the
numb er of representati ves varies from state
to state. For examp le, Uttar Prade sh has 31
memb ers while Tripu ra has 1 memb er only.
However, in USA, all states are given equal
repres entati on in the Senat e irresp ective of
their popul ation. USA has 50 states and the
Senat e has 100 memb ers-2 from each state.
2. Repre sentat ion of Union Territ ories The
repres entati ves of each union territo ry in the
Rajya Sabha are indire ctly electe d by members of an electo ral college specia lly consti tuted for the purpo se. This electi on is also
held in accord ance with the system of propo rtional repres entati on by mean s of the single
transf erable vote. Out of the eight union territorie s, only three (Delh i, Puduc herry and
Jamm u & Kashm ir) have repres entati on in
Rajya Sabha. The popul ations of other five
union territo ries are too small to have any
repres entati ve in the Rajya Sabha.
3. Nomi nated Memb ers The Presi dent
nomin ates 12 memb ers to the Rajya Sabh a
from peopl e who have specia l knowl edge or
practi cal exper ience in art, litera ture, science and social servic e. The ration ale behin d
this princi ple of nomin ation is to provide
emine nt perso ns a place in th e Rajya Sabha
witho ut going throug h the proces s of electio n.
It shoul d be noted here that the Amer ican
Senat e has no nomin ated memb ers.

~ 223

Composition of Lok Sabh a
The maxim um streng th of the Lok Sabha is
fixed at 550. Out of this, 530 memb ers are
to be the repres entati ves of the states and
20 memb ers are to be the repres entati ves of
the union territo ries.
At presen t, the Lok Sabha has 543 members. Of these, 524 memb ers repres ent the
states and 19 memb ers repres ent the union
territo ries.
I. Repre sentat ion of States The repres entatives of states in the Lok Sabha are direct ly
electe d by the peopl e from the territo rial constitue ncies in the states. The electi on is based
on the princi ple of unive rsal adult franch ise.
Every Indian citize n who is above 18 years
of age and who is n ot disqua lified under the
provis ions of the Const itutio n or any law is
eligib le to vote at such electi on. The voting
age was reduc ed from 21 to 18 years by the
61st Const itutio nal Amen dmen t Act, 1988.
2. Repre sentat ion of Union Territ ories The
Const itutio n has empow ered the Parlia ment
to prescr ibe the mann er of choos ing the represent atives of the union territo ries in the
Lok Sabha. Accordingly, the Parlia ment has
enacte d the Union Thrritories (Direc t Electi on
to the House ofthe People) Act, 1965, by which
the memb ers of Lok Sabha from the union
territo ries are also chose n by direct electi on.
3. Nomi nated Memb ers Before 2020, the
Presid ent nomin ated two memb ers from the
AnglO-India n comm unity2 to the Lok Sabha ,
if the comm unity was not adequ ately represented . Origin ally, this provis ion was to operate for ten years (Le., upto 1960) only. Later,
this durat ion has been exten ded contin uously since then by ten years each time. The
2An Anglo-Indian is a person whose father or

any
of whose other male progen itors in the male line
is or was of Europe an descen t but who is domici led
within the territo ry of India and is or was born
within such territo ry of parent s habitu ally residen t
therein and not merely established there for temporary purposes.

J

J

I

224 ,

Indian Polity

la st extension upto 2020 was made by the
95th Amendment Act, 2009. But, the 104th
Amendment Act, 2019, has not extended
furthe r t he operat ion of t hi s provi s ion. In
other words, the Amendment di sco ntinued
th is provision of spec ia l re prese ntati o n of
the Anglo-Ind ian co mm u n ity in t h e Lok
Sa bha by nomina t ion. Co n seq ue ntly, this
provi s ion ceased to have effect on the 25th
January, 2020.
The a ll ocation of sea ts in Parliament (bot h
the R.'1jya Sabha and the Lok Sabha ) for states
and union territories is given in Table 23.5.

j

SYSTEM OF ELECTIO NS
TO LOKSABHA

The various aspec ts related to the system of
e lections to the Lok Sa bha arc a s follows:

Territorial Constituencies
For the purpose of holding direct e lections
to the Lok Sabha, each state is di vided into
territorial const itu e ncies. In thi s respect,
the Constitut ion makes the fo ll owing two
provi sion s:
1 . Each state is allotted a number of seats
in the Lok Sabha i n such a manner that
the ratio between that number and its
popu lation is the S.1111e for all states.
Th is provision does not apply to a sta te
ha ving a population of less than six
millions.
z. Each state is divided into territoria l constituencies in suc h a manner that the
ratio betwee n the population of eac h
constituency and the number of sea ts
a ll otted to it is the same th roughout the
sta te.
In br ief, the Const itut ion ensures that
there is uniformity of representation in two
respects: (a) betwee n the diffe rent states, and
(b) between the different co nst itue ncies in
the sa me state.
The expression ' population ' mean s the
popu lation a s ascertained at the preced ing
ce nsu s of which the rel eva nt figures have
been pub lished.

Readjustment after each Census
After every census, a readjustment is to be
made in (a) a ll ocation of seats in the Lok
Sabha to the states, and (b) d ivision of each
state into territoria l co nstitu e ncies. Parliament is empowered to determine th e authority and the ma nn er in which it is to be made.
According ly, the Parliament has enacted th e
Delimitation COlllmission Acts i n ]952, 1962,
1972 and 2002 for this purpose.
The 42nd Amendmc nt Act of 1976 froze
the allocation of seats in the Lok Sa bha to
the st<l tes and the divi s ion of each state into
territorial co n stituen c ies till the yea r 2000
at the ]971 leve l. This ban on readjustment
was extended for a n other 25 yea rs (ie, upto
year 2026) by thc 84th Amendment Act of
2001 , with the sa me obj ec tive of encouraging
population lim iting mea sures.
The 84th Amendment Act of 2001 also
empowered t h e government to undertake
readjustment and rat iona li sa tion of territorial
con stit uen c ies in the states o n the ba s is of
the popu lation figu res of 1991 cens us. Late r,
the 87th Amendment Act of 2003 provided
for the de lim itatio n of constituencies o n the
ba sis of 2001 ce nsus and not 1991 ce nsus.
However, this can be done without altering
the number of scats allotted to eac h sta te i n
the Lok Sabha.

Reservation of Seats for SCs and STs
T hough the Const itution has <tba ndoned th e
system of comm una l represe ntation, it provides for th e reservation of seats for schedu led
castes and schedu led tribes in the Lok Sabha
o n the basis of population ratios 3 .
Originally, thi s reservation was to ope rate for ten years (ie, up to 1960), but it has
3.yhis means that the number of Lok Sabha scats re-

served in a state or union territory for such castes

and tribes is to bear the sa me proportion to the

total numbe r of seats allotted to that sta te o r union
territory in the Lok Sabha as the population of such
C<lstes and tribes in the co nce rned st<lte o r unio n
territory bears lO the tota l po pulation of state or
union territory.

Parliament

•

been extended continuously since then by
10 years each time. Now, under the 104th
Amendment Act of 2019, this reservation is
to last until 2030.
Though seats are reserved for scheduled
castes and scheduled tribes, they are elected by
all the voters in a constituency, without any
separate electorate. A member of scheduled
castes and scheduled tribes is also not debarred
from contesting a general (non-reserved) seat.
The 84th Amendment Act of 2001 provided
for refixing of the reserved seats on the basis
of the population figures of 1991 census as
applied to rationalisation of the general seats.
Later, the 87th Amendment Act of 2003 provided for the refixing of the reserved seats on
the basis of 2001 census and not 1991 census.
The state-wise reservation of seats for
SCs and S15 in the Lok Sabha is given in
Thble 23.5.

First-Past-The-Post System
Though the Constitution has adopted the
system of proportional representation in the
case of Rajya Sabha, it has not preferred the
same system in the case of Lok Sabha. Instead,
it has adopted the system of territorial representatio.n (First-pasHhe-post system) for the
election of members to the Lok Sabha.
Under territorial representation, every
member of the legislature represents a geographical area known as a constituency. From
each constituency, only one representative is
elected. Hence such a constituency is known
as single-member constituency. In this system, a candidate who secures majority of
votes is declared elected. This simple majority
system of representation does not represent
the whole electorate. In other words, it does
not secure due representation to minorities
(small groups).
The system of proportional representation aims at removing the defects of territorial representation. Under this system, all
sections of the people get representation in
proportion to their number. Even the smallest
section of the population gets its due share of
representation in the legislature.

~ 225

There are two kinds of proportional representation, namely, single transferable vote
system and list system. In India, the first kind
is adopted for the election of members to the
Rajya Sabha and state legislative council and for
electing the President and the Vice-President.
Though some members of the Constituent
Assembly had advocated the system of proportional representation for the election of
members to the Lok Sabha, the Constitution
has not adopted the system, due to tw·o reasons,
1. Difficulty for the voters to understand
the system (which is complicated) due
to low literacy scale in the' country,
2. Unsuitability to the parliamentary government due to the tendency of the system to multiply political parties leading
to instability in government.
Additionally, the system of proportional
representation has the following aemerits:
1. It is highly expensive.
2. It does not give any scope for organising
by-elections.
3. It eliminates intimate contacts between
voters and representatives.
4. It promotes minority thinking and group
interests.
5. It increases the significance of party system and decreases that of voter.

t DURATION OF TWO HOUSES
Duration of Rajya Sabha
The Rajya Sabha (first constituted in 1952)
is a continuing chamber, that is, it is a permanent body and not subject to dissolution.
However, one-third of its members retire every
second year. Their seats are fi1led up by fresh
elections and Presidential nominations at
the beginning of every third year. The retiring members are eligible for re-election and
renomination any number of times,
. The Constitution has not fixed the tenn of
office of members of the Rajya Sabha and left it
to the Parliament Accordingly, the Parliament
in the Representation of the People Act (1951)
provided that the term of office of a member
of the Rajya Sabha shall be six years. The act

226 "~ Indioo Polity
also empow ered the Presid ent of India to curtc'lil
the term of members chose n in the first Rajya
Sabha. In the first batch, it was decide d by lottery as to who should retire. Further, the act also
author ised the Presid ent to make provis ions to
govern the order of retirem ent of the memb ers
4
of the R.1jya Sabha •

Durat ion of Lok Sabh a
Un like the Rajya Sabha , the Lok Sabha is not
is five
1I contin uing chamb er. Its norma l tenn
years from the date of its first meetin g after the
genera l electio ns, after which it autom aticall y
dissolves. However, the Presid ent is author ised
to dissolve the Lok Sabha at any time even
before the comp letion of five years and this
canno t be challe nged in a court of law.
Furthe r, the term of the Lok Sa bha can be
exte nded during the period of nation al e mergency by a law of Parlia ment for one yea r at
a timeS for any length of time. However, this
exten sion canno t contin ue beyon d a period
of six month s after the emerg ency has ceased
to opera te.
The durati ons ofthe Lok Sabha (from first
to presen t) are menti oned in Thble 23.6.

t MEMBERSHIP OF PARLIAMENT
Quali ficati ons
The Const itut ion lays down the follow ing
qualif icatio ns for a perso n to be chose n a
memb er of the Parlia ment:
1. He/ she must be a ci tizen of India.
Z. He/ she must make and subsc ribe to an
oath or affirm ation before the person
Under this, the Preside nt has made the Rajya Sabha
(Thrm of Office of Members) Order, 1952.
~he tenn of the fifth Lok Sabha that was to expire
on 18 March, 1976, was extended by one year upto
18 March, 1977 by the House of the People (Exten·
sian of Duration) Act, 1976. It was extended for a fur·
ther period of one yenr up to 18 March, 1978 by the
House of the People (Extension of Duration) Amendment Act, 1976. However, the House was dissolved on
18 Januar y J977, after having been in existence for a
period offive years, JO month s and SL" days.
4

autho rised by the electi on co mmiss ion
for this purpo se. In his/ her oath or
affirm ation, he/ she swear s (a) 10 bea r true faith and allegi ance to
the Const itution of lnd_ia
(b) 1b uphold the sovere ignty and integrity of India
3. He/sh e must be not less than 30 years of
age in the case of the Rajya Sabha and
not less than 25 years of age in the case
of the Lok Sa bha.
4. I-Ie/ she mu st posses other qualif icatio ns
prescr ibed by Parlia ment.
The Parlia ment has laid down the follow ing additi onal qualif icatio ns in the Repre sentation of Peopl e Act ( 195]) .
). He/ she must be registe red as an electo r
for a parHa menta ry const ituency. This is
same in the case of both, the Rajya Sabha
and the Lok Sabha. The requir ement that
a cand idate conte sting an e lectio n to
the Rajya Sabha from a partic u lar state
should be an electo r in that partic ular
state was dispen sed with in 2003. In 2006,
the Supre me Court uphel d the co nstitutional validi ty of this chang e.
2 . He/ she must be a memb er of a sched uled
caste or sched uled tribe in any state or
union territo ry, if he/ she wants to contest a seat reserv ed for them. Howeve r,
a memb er of sched uled castes or sched uled tribes can also co ntest a seat not
reserv ed for them.

Disqu alific ations
Under the Co nstitu tion , a perso n shall be
disqua lified for being electe d as a memb er
of Parlia ment:
1. ifhe/ she ho lds any office of profit under
the Union or state gover nmen t (excep t
that of a minis ter or any othe r office
exemp ted by Parlia ment) .6
6A minist er in the Union or state govern ment is not
consid ered as holdin g the office of profit. Also, the
Parliam ent can declare that a particu lar office of
profit will not disquali fy its holder from pnrliamenta ry membe rship.

Parliament

2. if he/she is of unsound mind and stands
so declared by a court.
3 . if he /she is an undischarged insolvent.
4. if he/she is not a citizen of India or has
voluntarily acquired the citizenship of
a foreign state or is under any acknowledgement of allegiance to a foreign
state; and
5. if he/she is so disqualified under any law
made by Parliament.
The Parliament has laid down the following additional disqualifications in the Representation of People Act (1951):
1. He/she must not have been found guilty
of certain electoral offences or corrupt
practices in the elections.
2. He/she must not have been convicted for
any offence resulting in imprisonment
for two or more years. But, the detention
of a person under a preventive detention
law is not a disqualification.
3. He/she must not have failed to lodge an
account of his/her election expenses
within the time.
4. He/ she must not have any interest in
government contracts, works or services.
5 . He/she must not be a director or managing agent nor hold an office of profit in
a corporation in which the government
has at least 25 per cent share.
6. He/she must not have been dismissed
from government service for corruption
or disloyalty to the State.
7 . He/she must not have been convicted for
promoting enmity between different
groups or for the offence of bribery.
8. He/she must not have been punished for
preaching and practising social crimes
such as untouchability, dowry and sati.
On the question whether a member is
subject to any of the above disqualifications,
the President's decision is final. However, he/
she should obtain the opinion of the election
commission and act accordingly.

Disqualification on Ground of Defection
The Constitution also lays down that a person
shall be disqualified from being a member
of Parliament if he/she is so disqualified on

~ 227

the ground of defection under the provisions
of the Thnth Schedule. A member incurs disqualification under the defection law:
1. if he/she voluntarily gives up the membership of the political party on whose
ticket he/she is elected to the House;
2. if he/she votes or abstains from voting
in the House contrary to any direction
given by his/ her political party;
3. if any independently elected member
joins any political party; and
4. if any nominated member joins any political party after the expiry of six months.
The question of disqualification under the
Thnth Schedule is decided by the Chairman
in the case of Rajya Sabha and Speaker in the
case of Lok Sabha (and not by the President
of India). In Kihoto Hollohan case' (1992).
the Supreme Court ruled that the decision
of the Chairman/Speaker in this regard is
subject to judicial review.

Vacating of Seats
In the following cases, a member of Parliament vacates his/ her seat.

I. Double Membership A person cannot be
a member of both Houses of Parliament at
the same time. Thus, the Representation of
People Act (1951) provides for the following:
(a) If a person is elected to both the Houses
of Parliament, he/ she must intimate
within 10 days in which House he/she
desires to serve. In default of such intimation, his/ her seat in the Rajya Sabha
becomes vacant.
(b) If a sitting member of one House is also
elected to the other House, his/ her seat
in the first House becomes vacant.
(c) If a person is elected to two seats in a
House, he/she should exercise his/ her
option for one. Otherwise, both seats
become vacant.
Similarly, a person cannot be a member of
both the Parliament and the state legislature
at the same time. If a person is so elected,
7 Kiho(o Hollohan vs. Zachillhu ( 1992).

228 :(/ Indian Pality
hi s/ her sea t in Parliament beco mes vaca n t
if he/ she does not res ign his/ he r seat in the
state leg islature within 14 daysH.
2. Disqualification If a m e mb e r of
Pa rliam e n t beco mes subj ect to any of the di squali fication s spec ifie d in the Const itut ion ,
hi s/ her sea t becomes vacant . He re, the list
of di squalificatio n s a lso include the disqualifi ca tion on the groun ds o f defect ion unde r
th e provisions of the le n th Sch edule of the
Constitu tion.
3. Resignation A member may resign hi s/her
seat by writing to the Chairman of Raj ya Sabha
or Speaker of Lok Sabha , as the case may be.
The seat falls vaca nt whe n the resignation is
accepted . However, th e Cha irm an / Sp eaker
may not accept the resignation if he/she is
satisfied that it is not volun tary or genuin e.
4 . Absence A House ca n dec1 are the seat of
a member vaca n t if he/ she is absent fro m all
its meet ings for a period of s ixty days withou t
its permiss io n. In co mputing t he period of
sixty days, no accou nt shall be taken of a ny
period during wh ich the House is prorogued
or adjourned for more than four co nsecuti ve
days.
5. Other cases A membe r has to vacate h is/
her seat in the Parliament:
(a) if his/ her election is dec1ared vo id by the
court;
(b) if he/she is ex pell ed by the House;
(c) if he /s he is elected to the office of
Preside n t or Vice-President; and
(d) if he/she is appointed to the office of
governo r of a sta te.
If a disqualified person is elected to th e
Parl iament, the Consti tution lays down no
procedure to dec1are the election voi d . Thi s
matte r is dealt by the Represe ntation of the
Peo pl e Act ( 1951), wh ic h enab les the high
co urt to decl are an election vo id if a disqualifi ed ca ndidate is e lected. The aggrieved party
can appeal to th e Sup re me Court agai n st the
order of the high co urt in this regard.

Oath or Affirmation
Every member of eithe r House of Parliament,
before taking hi s/ her seat in the House, has to
make and subscribe to an oath or affirmation
before the Preside nt or some person appoi n ted
by him/ her for this purpose. In hi s/ her oath or
affirmatio n, a membe r of Parliament swears:
1. to bear true fait h a nd a ll eg ia nce to the
Co n st itution of Indi a;
2. to uphold the sove reignty a nd integrity
of Indi a; and
3. to faithfull y discharge th e duty upon
which h e/she is about to enter.
Unless a member takes th e oath, he/sh e
ca nnot vote and pa rticipate in the proceedings
of the House a nd does not become eligible to
parliamentary privileges a nd immunities.
A perso n is li ab le to a penalty of '{500 for
each day he/ she sits or votes as a member in
a Hou se in t he fo ll owi ng co nditions:
1. Before taking an d subscribing to the presc ribed oa th or affi rmati o n; or
2. When h e/s he kn ows that he / sh e is not
qua l ified or that he/ sh e is di squalified
for its membership; or
3. When he/ she knows that he/ she is prohibited from sittin g or vot ing in the House
by virtue of any parliame ntary law.

Salaries and Allowances
The members of either House of Parliament
a re entitl ed to rece ive such salaries and allowances as may be determined by Parliament,
and there is no provision of pension in th e
Co nstitution. However, in 1976, the Pa rliament
has provided pension to the members.
In 1954, the Parliament e nacted the Sa lary, Allowan ces and Pe ns ion of Members
of Parliament Act. In 20]8, the sala ry of
members wa s in c rea se d from '{SO,OOO to
n,oo,oo09per month, th e constituency allowance from t4S,OOO to t70,OOO per month and
the office ex pe n ses allowance from '{45,OOO
Finance Act, 201 8. This Act amended the
Sa la ry, Allowances and Pension of Members of Par·
Iiam ent Act, 1954.

9 Vide th e

6According to the prohibition of Si multaneous
Membership Rules (1950) made by th e Presiden t.

Parliament

~ 229

to '{60,OOO per mon th. Earlier in 2010, the
daily allowance was in creased from '{l,aOa
to '{2,OOO for each day of residence on duty.
Besides, the members are also provided
with travelling facilities, free accommodation,
telephone, vehicle advance, medical facilities
and so on.
In 2018, the pension of eve ry person who
has served for any period as a member of
Parliament was increased from . '{20,OOO to
'{2S,0009 per month. Further, if a person has
served as a member of Parliament for more
than five years, he/she is paid an additional
pension of '{2,OaO per month ( '{l ,SOO pe r
month before 2018) for every yea r served in
excess of five years.
The salaries and allowan ces of the Speaker
and Deputy Speaker of 10k Sabha and th e
Chairman and Deputy Chairman of Raj ya
Sabha are a lso determined by Parliame nt.
They are charged on the Con solidated Fund of
India and thu s are not subject to the annual
vote of Parliament.
In 1953, the Pa rliament enacted the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parliament
Act. Under this Act, "Officer of Parliam e nt ~
means any of the following officers, na mely,
the Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the
Rajya Sabha and the Speaker and th e Deputy
Speaker of the Lok Sabha. In 2018, the Parliament in creased the salary of the Chairman of
the Raj ya Sabha from n25 lakh to ~4 lakh
pe r month9a . Simi larly, other Officers of
Parliament (i.e., the Speaker and the De puty
Speaker of the , Lok Sabha and th e Deputy
Chairman of the Rajya Sabha) are entit led
to rece ive a sa lary per month at the sa me
rates as are payable to the Members of Pa rliament. Further; each Officer of Parliame nt
(other than the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha)
is entitled to rece ive a dai1y allowance (for
each day during the whole of his/ her te rm ) a t
the same rate as is p ayable to the Members of
Parliament. Also, each Officer of Parliament
(other than the Chairman of the Raj ya Sabha)

is entitled to receive a constituency allowance
at the same rate as is payabl e to the Me mbers
of Parliame nt.
According to the same Act, the sumptuary allowan ce is paid to the Speaker of the
Lok Sabha at the same ra te as is payable to a
Cabinet Minister9b (i.e., '{2,OOO per month).
Likewi se, the sumptuary al10wance is paid to
the De puty Speaker ·o f th e Lok Sabha and the
Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha at the
same rate as is payabl e to a Minister of State
(i.e., ~1000 per month):

9aSection 3 of the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parlia ment Act, 1953 (as amended).

9bSection 5 of the Sa laries and Allowances of Officers of Parliament Act, 1953 (as amended).

PRESIDING OFFICERS
OF PARLIAMENT
Each House of Parliament ha s its own presiding office r. There is a Speaker a nd a Deputy
Speaker for the Lok Sabha and a Chairman
and a Deputy Chairman for the Raj ya Sabha.
A pan el of ch airpersons for the Lok Sabha
and a pan el of vice-chairperson s for the Rajya
Sabha is also appointed.

Speaker of Lok Sabha
Elect ion a nd Tenure The Speaker is elec ted
by the Lok Sabha from amongst its m e mbers
(as soon as may be, aft e r its first sitting).
Wheneve r th e offi ce of the Speaker fall s
vacant, th e Lok Sabha e lects another me mber to fm th e vaca n cy. The date of election
of the Speaker is fix ed by the Preside nt.
Usual1y, the Speaker remains in office during the life of the Lok Sabha. Howeve r, he /sh e
has to vacate his/ her office ea rlier in any of
the following three cases:
1. if h e/ she ceases to be a membe r of the
Lok Sabha;
2. if he/ she resigns by writing to the Deputy
Speaker; and
3. ifhe/she is removed by a resolution passed
by a majority of all the then members of
the Lok Sabha (i.e., an effective majority).
Such a resolution can be moved only after
giving 14 days' advance notice.

230

£?

,
Indian Polity

When a resol ution for the rem oval of the
Speaker is under co ns ideration of the House,
he/ she ca nn ot presi de at the sitting of the
House, though he/ she may be present. However, h e/ she ca n spea k and take part in the
proceedings of the House at such a time and
vote in t he first instance, though not in the
case of an equality of votes.
It ShO ll lei be noted here that, whenever the
Lok Sabha is di sso lved, t he Speaker does not
vacate hi s/ her office and cont inu es till the
newly-elected Lok Sab ha meets.
The tenure of the Speake rs of the Lok
Sabha (from first to prese nt) is mentioned
in Thble 23.7.
Role. Powers and Functions The Speaker is
the head of the Lok Sabha, and its representative. He l she is the guardian of powers and
privileges of the members, the Hou se as a
whole and its co mmittees. He/ she is the principal spokesperso n of the House, and his/ her
decis ion is fina l in all Parlia mentary matters.
He/ she is thus much more t han mere ly the
presiding officer of the Lok Sabha. In these
capacities, he / she is vested with vast, varied
and vital respons ibilities a nd enjoys great
honour, high dig ni ty and supreme authOrity
within th e House.
T he Speaker of the Lok Sabha derives his/
her powers a nd duties from three sou rces, that
is, the Constitution of India, the Rules of Procedu re and Conduct of Business of Lok Sabha,
and Parl iame ntary Co nvention s ( residuary
powers that are unwritten or un specified in
the Rules). Altogether, he / she ha s the following powers and duti es:
1. He/ she maintain s order and decorum in
the Hou se for co nducting its business
and regu lating its proceed ings. This is
hi s/ her primary respons ibili ty and he/
she has final power in this regard.
2. He/ sh e is the final interpreter of the provisions of (a) the Co nstitution of India,
(b) the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business of Lok Sabha, and (c) the parliamentary precedents, within the Hou se.
3. I'le/she adjourns the Hou se or suspends
the meeting in absence of a qu orum .

The quorum to constitute a meeting
of t he Hou se is one-tenth of the total
stre ngth of the House.
4. I-Ie/ she does not vote in the first instance.
But he/ she can exercise a casting vote
in the case of a tie. In other wo rds, onl y
when the )'Iou se is divid ed equa l1 y on
any question, t he Speaker is entitled to
vote. Such vote is called c.:1.sti n g vote, and
its purpose is to resolve a deadlock.
5. Helshe presides over a jo i nt setting of the
two Houses of Parliament. Such a sittin g
is summoned by the President to settle
a deadlock be tween t he two Hou ses on
a bi ll.
6. He/ she ca n allow a 'secret' sitting of the
Hou se at th e request of the Leader of the
House. When the House sits in secret, no
stranger ca n be present in the chamber,
lobby or galleries except with t he perm ission of t he Speaker.
7. He/ she dec ides whether a bill is a money
bi ll or not a nd hislher decision on this
question is fina l. When a money bill is
transmitted to the Rajya Sabha for reco mmendation and presented to the President
for assent, the Speaker e ndorses on the bill
his/ her certificate that it is a money bill.
8. He/she decides the questions of disq ualification of a mem be r of the Lok Sab ha ,
arising o n the ground of defection under
the provisio ns of the Tenth Sched ul e.
In Ki/lOto Hollohan cascIO (1992), th e
Supreme Co urt ruled that the deci sion
of the Speaker in thi s regard is subject
to judicial revi ew.
9. He/ she acts as the ex-officio chairman of
t he Ind ian Parliamentary Group whi ch
is a lin k between the Parliament oflndia
and the various parliaments of the world.
I-I e/ she also acts as the e,y-officio chairman of the co nferen ce of presiding officers of legislative bodies in the country.
10. He/she appoints the cha irm an of all the
parliamentary committees of the Lok
Sab ha and superv ises their functioning.
IOKillOto Hollollalr vs. Zacl1il/Jw (1992).

Parliament

r

Helshe is the chairm an of. the Busin ess
Ad v i sory Commi ttee, th e Rul es
Committee and the Gen eral Purposes
Committee.

Independence and Impartiality As the office
of the Sp ea ke r is vested with great prestige,
position a nd a u thori ty, inde pe nde n ce a nd
impartia lity becomes its sine qua non ll ,
The foll owin g provision s en sure th e independen ce a nd impartiality of the offi ce of th e
Speaker:
1. Helshe is provided with a security of
tenure. He l sh e ca n be re moved only by
a resolu tio n passed by the Lok Sabha by
an effective majority ( ie, a maj or ity of
all the then m embe rs of the House) a nd
not by a simpl e majority (ie, a majority
of the members present and voting in the
H.ouse). Thi s motion of rem ova l ca n be
con sidered and discussed on ly when it
has the support of at least 50 m embers.
2. Hi s/ her sa lari es and allowa n ces are fixe d
by Pa rli ament. They are ch arged on the
Con so lidated Fund of India and thus
a re not subj ect to the annual vote of
Parlia ment.
3 . His/ h er wo rk and conduct ca nnot be discussed a nd criticised in the Lok Sabha
except on a substantive motion.
4. His/h er powers of regul ating procedure
or conducting busin ess or main ta ining
order in the House are n ot subj ect to the
jurisdiction of any Court.
llIn this context, V.V. Giri observed: "The holder of
an offi ce provided with such extensive authority
and power must discharge the duties of his/ he r
office impartially. So impartiality is regarded as a n
indispensable condition of the office of the Speaker,
who is the guardian of the powers and privileges
of the House and not of the poli tical pa rty with
whose support he/ she might have been elected to
the office. It is not possible fo r hi m/ her to maintai n order in the House unless he/ she enjoys the
confi dence of the minority parties by safegua rding their rightS and pri vil eges~. (, Powers of the Presiding Officers in Indian Legislature' in Jounull of
Consiru tionaf and Par lia men tary Studies, New Delhi ,
Vol II , No.4, Oct-Dec. 1968, p. 22)

~ 231

5. He/ she ca nnot vote in the first in sta nce.
He/ she ca n only exerc ise a castin g vote
in the even t of a tie. This m akes the
position of Spea ker impartial.
6 . He/ she is given a very high position in the
order of precedence. He/she is placed at
seve nth rank, along with the Chief J ustice
of In,dia. This mea ns, he/ she has a higher
rank than aU cabinet ministers, except the
Prime Minister or Deputy Prime Minister.
In Bri ta in, the Sp eaker is strictly a n onparty man . There is a co nvention that the
Speake r has to res ign fro m his/ h er party
and remai n politically ne utral. This hea lthy
con ven tion is n ot full y established in Indi a
where the Spea ker does n ot resign from th e
membership of his/ h er party on his/h er eJ ecti on to th e exa lted offi ce.

Deputy Speaker of Lok Sabha
Like the Spea ker, the De pu ty Speaker is also
elected by the Lok Sabha itself from a mongst
its members. He / sh e is elected after the election of the Spea ker h as ta ken place. The date
of ejection of the Deputy Speaker is fixed
by the Speaker. When ever th e office of the
Deputy Spea ker falls vaca nt, the Lok Sabha
elects a nother member to fiJI the vaca n cy.
Like th e Sp eaker, th e De puty Speaker
remains in office usual1y during the life of the
Lok Sabha. However, he/she may vacate h is/ her
office earl ier in any of the following three cases:
1. if he/ she ceases to be a m e mber of th e
Lok Sa bha;
2. if h e/s h e res ig n s by writin g to th e
Spea ker; a nd
3 . if he/ she is removed by a resolution passed
by a majority of all the th en members of
the Lok Sabha (i.e., an effective maj ority).
Such a resolution can be moved only afte r
giving 14 days' advan ce n otice.
The Dep uty Spea ker performs th e duties
of th e Speaker's office when it is va ca n t. He/
sh e also acts as the Spea ker when the latter is
absent from the sitting of the House. In both
the cases, he / she assum es all the powers of the
Speaker. He/ she also presides ove r the jo int

232

f?

Indian Polity

sitt in g of both the Houses of Pa rl ia ment, in
case the Speaker is absent from such a s itting.
It sho uld be noted here that th e Dep uty
Speaker is no t subordinate to t he Speaker.
He/ she is d irectly respo n sible to the Hou se.
The De p uty Speaker ha s one specia l privilege, that is, whenever he / she is appoi n ted as
a membe r of a parliamentary committee, h el
she auto matically beco mes its c hairman .
Like t he Speaker, the Deputy Spea ker, whi le
pres id ing over t he H Oll se, cannot vote i n the
first insta nce; he/she ca n on ly exercise a casting vote i n the case of a tie. Further, when
a reso lution for the re mova l of the Dep uty
Speake r is under conside ration of t he House,
he/ she cannot preside at the s itting of the
HOll se, t hough he/ she may be present.
Wh e n the Speake r pres ides over the House,
the Dep uty Speaker is like any other ordinary
member of th e Ho use. l'le/ she ca n speak in
the House, partici pate in its pro ceedi ngs a n d
vote on any questio n before th e House.
The Deputy Speaker is e ntitled to a regu lar
sa.lary and allowance fixed by Parliament, a nd
c harged on the Con so lidated Fund of Ind ia.
Us ua ll y, the speaker co mes fro m the rul ing
party (or ruling a ll iance), while the post of
Dep uty Spea ke r goes to th e oppos itio n party
(or opp os ition allia nce). However, th ere have
bee n certa in exceptiona l cases in th is regard.
Th e Speaker and the De puty Speake l~ whi le
assuming their offices, do not make and subsc ribe any separate oath or affi rmation .
The in stitution s of Speaker a nd Deputy
Speaker originated in Ind ia in 1921 under
the provi sio ns of the Government of India
Act of J9.19 (Mo n tague-Chelmsford Reform s).
At lhat time, the Speaker a nd the De pu ty
Spea ke r were ca l1 ed t he President a nd Deputy
Presi de nt respectively a nd the sa me nom e nclature co ntinued till 1947. Before 1921, the
Governor-General of India used to pres ide
over the meetings of the Central Legislati ve
Council. In 1921, t he Freder ic k Whyte and
Sfl ch ida na nd Si n ha we re appoi n ted by the
Gove rnor-Gene ra l of ind i,a as th e first Speaker
an d th e first Deputy Speake r (res pective ly)
of t he ce ntra l legislative a sse mb ly. In 1925,

Vitha lbha i J. Patel beca me the first Indian
an d the fi rst elected Speaker of the ce n tra l
leg islative asse mbl y. T h e Governme n t of
Ind ia Act of 1935 ch anged the no men clatures
of Pres id e n t and Deputy Preside~t of the
Central Legislative Assembl y to the Spea ke r
and Deputy Speake r respectively. However,
the old nomen c lature co nti nu ed ti ll 1947
as the federal part of t he 1935 Act was not
implemented. G.V. Mavala n kar and An anthasaya nam Ay yanga r had th e d istinc tion of
bei ng th e first Speaker a nd t he fi rst Dep uty
Speaker (respective ly) of the Lok Sabha. G.\'.
Mava lankar also he ld the post of Speaker in
the Co nstituent Asse mb ly (Legislative) as we ll
as the provis io na l Parliament. He/ she held
the post of Speaker of Lok Sabha continuously
for one decade from 1946 to 1956.

Panel of Chairpersons of Lok Sabha
Under the Ru les of Lok Sabha, t he Speake r
n ominates from a m ongst th e members a
pan e l of not more than ten cha irperso ns. Any
of th e m can pres ide over the House in the
absence of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker.
He/ s he has the sa me power as t he Speaker
when so preS idi ng. He / she holds office until
a new pane l of c hairpe rso ns is no mi nated.
Whe n a me m be r of the pa ne l of cha irpe rso ns
is a lso not present, any other person as determined by House acts as t he Speaker.
It must be emphasised here that a member
of Lbe panel of chairpe rso ns ca nnot preside
over the House, when the office of the Speaker
o r the Deputy Speaker is vacant. Du ring such
tim e, the Speake r's duties are to be perfo rmed
by such mem ber of th e l'louse as the Pres ident
may appoi nt for t he purpose. T he election s arc
held, as soon as possible, to fi ll the vacant posts.

Speaker Pro Tem
As provided by the Constitution, the Speaker
of the last Lok Sabha vacates his/ her office
immediately be fore the first meeting of the
new ly-e lected Lok Sa bha. Therefore, the Presiden t appoi nts a me mbe r of the Lo k Sabh a as
the Speaker Pro Thm. Usua ll y, the seniormost

Parliament

memb er is select ed for this. The Presid ent
admin isters oath to the Speak er Pro Thm.
The Speak er Pro Thm ha s a ll the power s of
the Speaker. He/ she presid es over the first sitting of the n ewly-e lected Lok Sabha . His/ h e r
main duty is to admin iste r oath to the new
memb ers. He /she also enabl es the Hou_se to
elect the new Spea ker.
When th e n ew Speak e r is electe d by th e
House, the offioe of the Speak er Pro Thm
ceases to exist. Hence , thi s office is a te mporary office, ex isting for a few days l2.

Chair man of Ra;ya Sabh a
The presid ing office r of the Rajya Sabha is
known as the Cha irman . The Vice-P reside nt
of India is the ex.-officio Chairm an of the Rajya
Sabha . Durin g .a ny p eriod wh en the VicePresid ent acts as Presid ent or discha rges the
functi ons of the Presid ent, he/sh e does n ot
perfor m the duties of the offi ce of the Chairman of Rajya Sabha .
The Chairm ~n of the Rajya Sabha can be
removed from his/ her office only if he/ she is
removed from the office of the Vice-P reside nt.
As a presid ing officer, the power s and functi ons
of the ChairI"itan in the Rajya Sabha are simila r
to those of the Speak er in the Lok Sabha . However, the Speak er has two specia l powers which
a re not enjoye d by the Chairm an:
J. ' The Speak er decide s wheth e r a bill is a
mon ey biJI or not a nd his/ he r dec ision
on this quest ion is final.
2. The Speak er presides over a joint sitting
of two House s of Parlia ment.
. Unlike the Speaker (who is a memb er of the
House), the Chairm a n is not a member of the
House. But like the Speaker, the Chairm a n also
canno t vote in the first instan ce. He/sh e too can
cast a vote in the case of an eq'uali ty of votes.
The Vice-P reside nt ca nnot preside over a
sitting of the Rajya Sabha as its Chairm an
I2Far examp h:, in the 13th Lok Sabha, Mr. Indraji t
Gupta 'was ! appoin ted as Speake r Pro Thm o n
20 Octobe r 1999 and remain ed in that office till
22 Octobe r 1999 when the new Speaker, Mr. G.M .C.
8alayo gi was elected.

~, 233

when a resol ution far his/ her re mova l is under
consid eratio n. However, he/sh e can be presen t
a nd speak in the House a nd ca n take pa rt in
its procee dings, withou t voting, even at such a
time (while the Speak er can vate in the first
instan ce when a resolu tion for his/he r removal
is unde r co nsider ation of the Lok Sabha ).
As in case of the Sp eaker, the salaries a nd
allow ances of the Cha irm an a re al so fix e d
by the Parlia ment. T h ey are cha rged on t he
Conso lidate d Fund of In dia and thus a re not
subjec t to t h e an nu a l vote of Parlia ment.
Durin g any period when the Vice-President
acts as Presid ent or discha rges the fun ctions of
th e Presid ent, he/ she is not entitl ed to any salary or allowance payab le to the Chairm an of the
Rajya Sabha . But he/sh e is pa id the sa lary a nd
allowa nce of the Presid ent during such a ti me.

Depu ty Chair man of Ra.;ya Sabh a
The Deput y Ch ai rman is electe d by the Rajya
Sab h a itse lf from amon gst its m em bers.
Wh e never the office of th e Deput y Chair man
fa lls vacan t, the Raj ya Sabha elects a noth er
memb e r to fill the vacan cy.
The De put y Chair m an va cates his/ h e r
office in any of the fo llowin g three cases:
1. if h e/ she ceases to be a me mber of the
Hajy. Sabha;
2. if he / sh e reS ign s by writin g to the
Chair man; and
3. if he / she is re moved by a resolu ti on
passed by a major ity of all the then
memb ers of the Raj ya ·Sabha (Le., an
effecti ve major ity). Such a resol ution
ca n be moved onl y after giving 14 days'
a dva n ce notice .
The De puty Chair man pe rform s the duti es
of the Ch airma n 's office when it is vaca nt
or when the Vi ce-Pre sident acts as P.resid ent
or discha rges the fun ctions of the Presid e nt .
He/ she a lso acts as the Chair m a n wh en the
latter is absen t fro m the sitti ng of th e House.
In both the cases, h e/she has all the powe rs
of the Cha irma n .
It should be empha sised here that the Deputy
Chairm an is not subord inate to the Chairm a n.
He/sh e is directly responsible to the Rajya Sabha.

234

,r(! Indian Polity

Like the Cha irm an, the Deputy Chairman ,
whil e presiding over the House, ca nnot vote in
the first instance; he/she ca n onl y exercise it
casting vote in th e case of a tie. F'urther, when
a reso lution for the removal of the Deputy
Chairm an is under co nsideratio n of the House,
he/she ca nnot pres ide over a sitting of the
House, though h e/ she may be prese n t.
When the Chainnan presides over the House,
the Deputy Chainnan is like any other ordinary
member of the House. He/ she ca n sp eak in th e
House, participate in its proceedings and vote
on any question before the House.
Like the Chairm an, the De puty Chairma n
is also e nti tled to a regular sa lary and a ll owance. They are fixed by Parlia ment and are
charged on the Conso lidated Fund of Ind ia.

Panel of Vice-Chairpersons of Rajya Sabha
Under th e Rules of Rajya Sab ha, the Cha irman nominates from a mongst the me mbers
a panel of vice-ch ai rperso ns. Anyone of th em
ca n preside over the Hou se in th e a bsen ce of
the Chair man or the Deputy Cha irman . He/
she has the sam e powers as the Cha irm an
when so presiding. He/ she holds office unt il a
new panel of vice-chai rperso ns is nominated.
Wh e n a member of the pan el of vicechairperso ns is also not prese nt, any other
person as dete rmin ed by the Ho use acts as
the Chairma n.
It m ust be emphasised he re that a me mber of the panel of vice-chairpersons cann ot
preside over the House, when the office of the
Chairm an o r th e Deputy Chairman is vaca n t.
During such time, the Chairman's duties arc
to be performed by such member of the Hou se
as the President may a ppoint fo r the purpose.
The elections a re held, as soon as pOSSibl e, to
fi ll the vacant posts.

Secret a riat of Parliament
Each House of Parliament has separa te secreta rial staff of its own, though there ca n
be so me posts common to both the Houses.
Their recruitment and service co ndi tions are
regulated by Parliament. The secretariat of each

House is headed by a secret.1. ry-general. He/ she
is a permanent officer and is appo in ted by the
presiding officer of the House.

t LEADERS IN PARLIAMENT
Leader ofthe House

Under the Rules of Lok Sabha, the ' Leader of
the House' mea ns the prime minister, if he/
she is a member of the Lok Sabha, or a min ister who is a member of the Lok Sabha and is
nominated by th e prime mini ster to fun ct ion
as the Leader of the House. Th ere is a lso a
' Leade r of the House' in the Rajya Sabha. He/
she is a minister and a member of the Rajya
Sabha a nd is nominated by the prime minister
to function as such. The leader of the house in
either House is an important fun ctionary a nd
exerc ises direct influen ce on the cond uct of
business. He/she can also nom inate a de puty
leader of the House. The same funct ion ary in
USA is kn own as the ' majority leader'.

Leader of the Opposition
In each House of Pa rl iament, there is the
'Leader of the Opposition'. In a parliamentary
system of govern ment, the leader of the opposition has a signifi ca nt role to play. I-lis/her main
functions are to provide a constructive criticism of the policies of the governmen t and to
provide an alternative government. Therefore,
the leaders of Opposition in the Lok Sa bha
and the Raj ya Sabha were accorded statutory
recognition in 1977 under the Salary and All owa nces of Leaders of Opposition in Parliament
Act, 1977. They a re also entitled to the sa lary,
allmV'd nces and other faciliti es equi va lent to
that of a cabinet minister. It was in 1969 that an
official leader of the opposition was recogn ised
for the first ti me. The sa me functionary in USA
is kn own as the ' min ority leader'.
Under the above Act, the ' Leade r of the
Oppos ition' mea ns that me mber of the Rajya
Sabha or the Lok Sabha who is, for the tim e
being, the Leader in that House of the party
in oppos ition to the government having th e
grea test nume rical strength and recognised

Parliament

as such by the Chair m an or the Speak er.
Furthe r, where there are two or more partie s
in oppos ition to the gover nmen t havin g the
same nume rical streng th, the Chair man or
the Speak er shall (havin g regard to the status of the partie s) recogn ise anyo ne of the
Leade rs of such partie s as the Leade r of the
Oppos itio n and such recogn ition shall be final
and conclu sive. Accor ding to the direct ions
issued by both the Cha irman and the Speaker,
the minim um nume rical streng th requir ed
for recog nition as a politic al party is onetenth of the total memb ership of that House.
The Britis h politic al system has a n uniqu e
institu tion called the 'Shado w Cabin et'. It is
forme d by the Oppos ition party to balan ce
the ruling cabin et and to prepa re its members for future minis terial offices. In this
shado w cabin et, almos t every memb er in the
ruling cabin et is 'shado wed' by a corres ponding memb er in the oppos ition cabine t. This
shado w cab in et serves as the 'altern ate cabin et' if there is chang e of gover nmen t. That
is why Ivor Jenni ngs descri bed the leader of
Oppo sition as the 'altern ative Prime Minister'. He/sh e enjoys the status of a minis ter
and is paid by the gover nmen t.
Thoug h the offices of the leader of the
House and the leader of the Oppo sition are
not menti oned in the Const itutio n of Indi a,
they are menti oned in the Rules ofthe House
and Parlia menta ry Statut e respec tively .

Whip s
The office of 'whip ' is menti oned n eith er in
the Const itution of India nor in the Rules
of the House. It is based on the conve ntions
of the parlia menta ry gover nmen t.
Every poJitical party, wheth e r ru ling or
oppos ition has its own Chief whip and whips
in the ParHa ment. The whip is appoi nted by
the political party to serve as an assista nt floor
leader:. He/sh e is charge d with the responsibility of ensuri ng the atte ndan ce of his/ her party
memb ers in large numb ers and securi ng their
suppo rt in favour of or agains t a partic ular
issue. He/sh e regula tes and monit ors their
behav iour in the Pa rliame nt. The memb ers

'tt 235

are suppo sed to follow the direct ives given by
the whip. Other wise, discip linary action can
be taken.
Th e Chi ef whip ofthe gover nmen t party in
the Lok Sabha is the Minis ter of Parlia menta ry
Affairs. In the Rajya Sabha, the Minis ter of
State for Parlia menta ry Affairs holds this position. The Chief whip is direct ly respon sible to
the leader of the House. It is part of his/he r
duties to advise the gover nment on parlia mentary busin ess and to maint ain a close liaiso n
menta ry
with the minis ters in regard to parlia12a
busine ss affect ing their depar tment s .
The Chi ef whip of a recog nised party and
a recog nised group is entitl ed to teleph one
and secret arial facilit ies under the Leade rs
and Chief Whips of Recog nised Partie s and
Group s in Parlia ment (Facil ities) Act, 1998.
Under the above Act, a recog nised party
mean s every party which has a streng th of
not less than fifty-five memb ers in respec t
of the Lok Sabha and twenty -five memb ers in
respec t of the Rajya Sabha . Simila rl y, a rec·
ognise d group mean s every party whi ch has
a stren gth of not less than thirty memb ers in
respec t of the Lok Sabha and fifteen memb ers
in respec t of the Raj ya Sabha.

t SESSIONS OF PARLIAMENT
Summoning

The Presid ent from time to time summ ons
each House of Parlia ment to meet at such
time and place as he/ she thinks fit. But, the
maxim um gap betwe en two sessio ns of Parliame nt ca nnot be more than six month s.
In other words, the Parlia ment shou ld meet
at least twice a year. There are usuall y three
sessio ns in a year, viz,
1. The Budget.Sess ion (Febr uary to May);
2. The Monsoon Session (July to September);

and

3. The Wint er Sessio n (Nove mber to
Decem ber).
Practic e and Procedure of Parliam ent, Sixth Edition , 2009, Lok Sabha

I1oI M.N. Kau l a nd S.L. Shakdher;

Secretariat, pp. 151-52.

I

236

":'1

Indian Polity

In other words, when the House is adjourned

A 'session' of Parl iament is the period
spanning betwee n th e first sitting ofa House
and its prorogation (or dissolution in the
case of the Lok Sabha). During a session, the
House meets everyday to transact business.
The period spanning between the prorogatio n of a House and its reassembly in a n ew
sessio n is called ' recess'.

without naming a day for reassembly, it is
ca ll ed adjournment sine die. The power of
adjournment as well as adjournment sine die
li es with the presiding officer of the House.
He/ she can also ca ll a s itting of the House
before the date or time to which it has been
adjourned or at any time after the House has
been adjourned s ine die.

Adjournment

Prorogation

A session of Parliament consists of man y
m eetings. Each meeting of a day consists of
two sittings, that is, a morning sitting from
11 am to 1 pm and post-lunch sitting from
2 pm to 6 pm. A Sitting of Parliament ca n be
terminated by adjournment or adjournment
sine die or prorogation or dissolution (in
the case of the Lok Sa bha ). An adjournment
suspends the work in a sitting for a specified
time, which may be hours, days or weeks.

Th e presiding office r (S peaker or Chairman)
declares the House adjourned sine die, when
the business of a session is completed. Within
the next few days, the President issues a
notification for prorogation of the sessio n .
However, the President can also prorogue the
House while in session.
The specific differences between adjourn·
ment and pro rogation arc summarised in

1llble 23.1.

Adjou rnment Sine Die

Dissolution

Adjournment sine die means terminating a
sitting of Parliament for an indefinite period.

Rajya Sabha, being a permanent House, is not
subject to dissolution. On ly the Lok Sabha is

Table 23.1 Adjournment vs Prorogation
Adjournment

Prorogation

1.

It only terminates a sitting and not a session of
the House.

1.

It not only terminates a sitting but also a session of
the House.

2.

It is done by presiding offtcer of the House.

2.

It is done by the President of India.

3.

It does not affect the bills or any other business
pending before the House and the same can be
resumed when the House meets again.

3.

It also does not affect the bills or any other business
pending before the House. 13 However. all pending
notices (other than those for Introducing bills) lapse
on prorogation and fresh notices have to be given for
the next session\3". In Britain. prorogation brings to
an end all bills or any other business pending before
the House.

IJUnder Article 107 (3) of the Constitution, a bill pending in Parliament shall not lapse by reason of the
prorogation of the Houses.
Under Rule 336 of the Lok Sabha, a motion, resolution or an amendment, which has been moved and is
pend ing in the House, shall not lapse by reason only of the prorogation of the 1·louse.
13aUnder Rule 335 of the Lok Sabha, on the prorogation of the House, all pend ing notices, other than
notices of intention to move for leave to introduce a Bill, sha ll lapse and fresh noti ces sha ll be given for
th e next session.

,

Parliament

subject to dissolution. Unlike a prorogation,
a dissolution ends the very life of the existing
House, and a n ew House is constituted after
general electio ns are h eld. The dissoluti on
of the Lok Sabha may take place in either of
two ways:
1. Automatic dissolution, that is, on the
expiry of its tenure of five yea rs or the
terms as extended during a nati onal
emergen cy; or
2. Whenever the President decides to dissolve
the House, which helshe is authorised to
do. Once the Lok Sabha is dissolved before
the co mpletion of its normal tenure, the
dissolution is irrevocable.
When the Lok Sabha is dissolved, all busi·
ness including bills, motions, resolutions,
notices, petitions and so on pending before
it or its committees lapse. They (to be pur·
sued further) must be reintroduced in the
newl y-constituted Lok Sabha. However, so m e
pending bills and all pending assurances
that are to be examined by the Co mmittee on
Government Assurances do not lapse on the
dissolution of the Lok Sabha. The position
with respect to lapsing of bills is as fo l1ows:
1. A bill pending in the Lok Sabha lapses
(whether originating in the Lok Sabha
or transmitted to it by the Rajya Sabha).
2. A bill passed by the LokSabha but pending
in the Rajya Sabha lapses.
3. A bill not passed by the two Houses du e
to disagreem ent and if the President has
notified the holding of a joint sitting
before the dissolution of Lok Sabha, does
not lapse.
4. A bill pending in the Rajya Sabha but not
passed by the Lok Sabha does not lapse.
5. A bill passed by both Houses but pending
assent of the President does not lapse.
6. A bill passed by both Houses but returned
by the President for reconsideration of
Houses does not lapse.

Quorum
Quorum is the minimum number of members
required to be present in the House before it
can transact any business. It is one-tenth of

~, 237

the total number of members in each House
including the presiding officer. It m eans that
there must be at least 55 members present in
the 10k Sabha and 25 members present in the
Rajya Sabha, if any business is to be conducted.
If there is no quorum during a meeting of the
House, it is the duty of the presiding officer
either to adjourn the House or to suspend the
meeting until there is a quorum.

Voting in House
All matters at any sitting of either House or
joint sitting of both the Houses are decided by
a majority of votes of the members present and
voting, excluding the presiding officer. Only a
few matters, which are specifically mentioned in
the Constitution, require either effective majority or special majority, not simple majority.
The presiding officer of a House does not
vote in the first instance, but exerci ses a casting vote in the case of a n equal ity of votes.
The proceedings of a House arc to be valid
irrespective of any unauthori sed voting or par·
ticipation or any vaca ncy in its membership.
The follO\ving points ca n be noted with
respect to the voting procedure in the Lok Sabh.,
1. On the co nclusion of a deba te, the
Speaker shall put the question and
invite those who are in favour of the
moti o n to say 'Aye' a nd those agai n st
the motion to say .' No'.
2. The Speaker shan then say' 'r think the
Ayes (o r the Noes, as the case may be)
have it.' If the opinion of the Speaker as
to the decision of a question is not ch?llenged, hel she shall say twice: The Ayes
(or the Noes, as the case may be) have it'
and the question befo re the House shall
be dete rmined accordingly.
3. (a) If the opinion of the Speaker as to
the decis ion of a question is challenged, hel she shall order that the
Lobby be cleared.
(b) After the lapse of three minutes and
thirty seconds, hel she shall put the
qu estion a second time and decla re
whether in his l h e r opinion the
'Ayes' or the 'Noes' have it.

238

,(1' Indian Polity

(c) If the opinion so declared is again
challenged, hel she shall direct that
the votes be recorded either by operat ing the automatic vote recorder or
by usin g 'Aye' and 'No' Slips in the
House or by the Members go ing into
the Lobbies.
4 . If in the opinion of the Speaker, the
Division is unnecessaril y claimed, hel
she l1)ay ask the members who are for
'Aye' and those for 'No' respectively to
rise in their places and, on a count being
taken, he lshe may declare the determinat ion of the House. In such a case, the
names of the voters sha ll not be recorded.

Methods of Voting
The various methods adopted for voting in the
Lok Sabha are explained bclow l 3b :
1. Voice Vote: It is a sim ple method for
decid ing a question put by the Spea ke r
on a motion made by a member. Under
this method, the quest ion before the
House is dete rm ined by the 'Ayes' or the
'Noes', as the case may be.
2. Division: There are three methods of
holding a Di vis ion. These are:
(a) By operating the Automatic Vote
Recording Eq uipment;
(b) By distributing 'Ayes' and 'Noes' slips
in the House; and
( c) By members going into the Lobbies.
However, the method of reco rding of
votes in the Lobbies ha s become obsolete ever sin ce the insta llation of the
Automatic Vote Recording Equipment.
3_ Secret Ballot: During an 'open' voting period, the individual results are
show n by the three co lours: green
for 'Ayes', red for 'Noes' and ye llow
for 'Abstain' on the Individual Resu lt
Disp la y Panel. The secret voting, if
any, is held on similar lines except that
the Light Emitting Diode (LED) on the
13t>.rhis information is adopted from the offi cia l
website of the Lok Sa bha (Digit.:. . ! Sansad).

Indi vidual Re sult Display Pane l flashes
only wh ite light to s how that the vote
ha s been recorded.
4. Recording of Votes by Distribution of
Slips: The method of recording of votes
by members on 'Ayes' and 'Noes' slips is
generally resorted to in the eventuality of:
(a) Sudden fa il ure of the working of
the Automatic Vote Record ing
Equipment; and
(b) At the commencement of the new
Lok Sabha, before the sea ts/ division numbers have been allotted to
the members.
5. Physical Count of Members in their
Places In stea d of a Formal Division: If
in the opinion ofthe Speaker, a Division
is unnecessa ril y cla im ed, he/sh e may
ask the members who are for 'Ayes' and
those for 'Noes', respectively, to rise in
their places and on a count being takes,
he/ she may declare the determination
of the Hou se. In suc h a case, the particulars of voting of the members are not
recorded.
6. Casting Vote: If in a Division, the number of 'Ayes' and 'Noes' is equal, the
question is dec ided by the casting vote
of the Speaker. Under the provi sions of
the Constitution, the Speaker (or the
person acting as suc h) cannot vote in a
Division; he/s he has on ly a casting vote
which he/ she must exercise in the case
of e quality of votes.

Language in Parliament
The Constitution has declared Hindi and English to be the languages for transacting business in the Parliament. However, the presidi ng
officer ca n penn it a member to address the
House in his/ her mother-tongue. In both the
Houses, facilities are available for si multaneous interpretation of speeches made in
a ny of the languages specified in the Eighth
Schedule of the Constitution into Hindi and
Engli sh. However, if a member addresses the
House in a language for which s imulta neous
in terpretaton faci li ty is not avai lab le, he / she

Parliament

has to provide a translation copy of his/ h er
speech in Hindi or English.
Though English was to be discontinued
as a fl oor language after the ex pirati on of
fifteen yea rs from the co mm en ce m ent of the
Co nstitution (that is, in 1965), the Official
Languages Act (19 63) allowed English to be
continued along with Hindi.

Rights of Ministers and Attorney General
In addition to the members of a House, every
minister and the attorney general of India
have the right to speak and take part in the
proceedings of either House, any jOint sitting
of both the Houses and any committee of Par·
liament of which he/ she is a member, without
being entitled to vote. There are two reasons
underl ying thi s constitutional provision:
I . A minister can participate in the proceedings of a House, of which h e/she is not
a member. In othe r words, a minister
belonging to the Lok Sabha ca n par·
ticipate in the proceedings of the Rajya
Sabha and vice·versa.
2. A minister, who is not a m ember of either
House, ca n participate in the proceed.
ings of both the Houses. It sh ould be
noted h ere that a person can remain a
minister for six months, without being a
m ember of either House of Parliament.

Lame-duck Session
It refe rs to the last session of the preceding
Lok Sabha, after a new Lok Sabha has been
elected. Those m embers of the preceding Lok
Sabha who could not get re·elected to the new
Lok Sabha are called lame-ducks.
During th e yea rs 1957 and 1962 when
general elections to Lok Sabha were h eld,
in addition to three sessions of the n ew Lok
Sabha, one session each of the preceding
Lok Sabha wa s also held after electio ns to
n ew Lok Sabha had taken place and results
thereof had been a nn o un ced, but before
the new Lok Sabha was duly constituted.
These were popularl y known as "lame-duck
sessions". Th e purpose of th ese sess ions was

~ 239

to pass the Vote on Account to enabl e the government to ca rryo n till the n ew Lok Sabha
was co nstituted. However, th ere was no lam educk session of the Third Lok Sabha as the
Fourth Lok Sabha was constituted soo n after
the result of the Fourth General Elect ions
had bee n announced. The Vote on Account
was passed in the first sess ion of the n ew
Lok Sabha l 3c .

t TYPES OF MAJORITY

The following four types of majority are
required to determine the various matters in
the Parliament:

II ISimple Majority
Tt is a majority of the members present and

voting in the House. It is also known as ordinary majority or functional majority or working majority. Article 100 of the Constitution
states that except as otherwise provided in
this Co nstitution, all questions at any sitting
of either House or joint sitting of the Houses
shall be determined by a majority of votes of
the members present and voting. This means
that the simple majority is the general rule prescribed by the Constitution for the determination of questions in the Parliament. This type
of majority is required in the following cases:
(a) Passing of the ordinary bills, money bills
a nd financial bills.
(b) Passing of the Adjournment Motion, No·
Confide nce Motion, Confidence Motion,
Censure Motion and Motion of Thanks.
(c) Removal of the Vice-President in the Lok
Sabha (Article 67).
(d) Approval of the imposi tion of the
President's Rule (Articl e 356).
( e) Approval of the proclamation of financial
emergency (Article 360).
(f) Election of the Speaker and the Deputy
Speaker of the Lok Sabha (Article 93).
Kaul and S.L. Shakdher, Practice and Procedure of Parliament, Sixth Edition, 2009, Lok Sabha
Secretariat, pp. 454-55.

13cM .N .

240 ,~ Indion Polity
(g) Elect io n of th e Deputy Chai rman of the
R"iya Sa bha (A rticle 89).
(h ) Passi ng of a resolution by th e Lok Sabha
fo r disa pprov in g the continuance o f the
naliona l emergency (A rticl e 352).

!I IEffective Majority
It means a m ajority of the total membership
of th e House excluding the vaca n t seats. In
other wo rds, it is it major ity of the effective
stre ngth of the I-louse. For exa mpl e, the effective major ity in th e case of R.:1j ya Sa bha is
111 , if th e re are 25 vaca nt seats (o ut of the
tota l 245 m e mbers). Simil arly, the effec ti ve
major ity in the case of Lok Sabha is 265 if
there are 15 vaca nt sea ts (out of the total 543
members). This type of maj ority is refe rred
in the Co nstitution as ~a maj o r ity of a ll th e
th en membe rs of the House". It is required in
th e folJow i ng cases:
(a) Removal of the Vice·Preside nt in the
Ra.jya Sabha (A rt icl e 67)
(b) Re mova l of the Deputy Chairma n of the
Rajya Sabha (A rticle 90)
(c) Removal of the Speake r and the Deputy
Speaker of the Lok Sa bha (Art icl e 94 )

II IAbsolute Majority
It mea ns a majority of the tota l membership

of th e !-l ouse, irrespec ti ve of the fact wh et her
there are vacant sea ts o r abse ntees. For exam.
pi e, th e absolu te majo rity in the case of Rajya
Sabha is 123 ( out of the tota l 245 m embers).
Si mil arly, the absolute majo ri ty in the case of
Lo k Sabha is 272 (out of the total 543 mem.
bers). T his type of majority is not prescribed
by the Co nstituti on for a ny ca se (o r p u r pose)
as a sL.' lndalon e (s ingl e) req uirement. But, it
is required in certa in cases as a compone n t
of spec ia l majority ( i.e., sp ec ia l majority-I
which is explai ned be low).

D ISpecial Majority
The va riou s cases of req uireme n t of specia l
m ajor ity can be furth er cla ss ified in the fo llowi ng way:

Special Majority-I A majority of the tota l
m e mbership of each House a nd a two-thi rds
majority of the m e mbers prese nt a nd vot in g
is requ ired in the fo ll owi ng cases:
(a) Am e ndm ent of the Co nstitution (A rticl e
368)
( b ) Re mOVed of th e .Judges of the Supre m e
Court (A rt icl e 124)
(c) Re mova l of the Judges of the High Courts
(Art icl e 217)
( d ) Remova l of the Compt rolle r and Aud itor
Ge ne ra l of Ind ia (Art icle 148)
(e) Remova l of the Ch ief Electio n Commiss io ner (Article 324)
(f) Re m ova l of the State E l ec tion
Co mm iss io ner ( Articl e 243K)
(g) Pa rlia mentary approval of proclamation
of nationa l e me rgen cy (Art icl e 352 )
Special Majority-II A two-third s maj or.
ity of t he tota l m e mbership of each House
is requ ired fo r th e i mpeachm e nt of t he
President (A rticl e 61).
Special Majority-III A two·thirds m ajo rity of
the m em bers presen t a nd voting ( in th e Raj )'a
Sabh a) is required in the followin g cases:
(a) Recomm en datio n for the creation of new
All-In di a Se rvices (A rticle 3] 2)
(b) Parliamentary legislati on on matters in
the State Li st ( Art icle 249)

DEVICES OF PARLIAMENTARY
PROCEEDINCS
Question Hour
T he first hour of eve ry parliame n tary sitti ng is slotted fo r thi s. During this time, the
me mbers ask qu estions a nd the m in isters
usua ll y give answers. The qu estions a rc of
three kinds, namel y, starred , unstarred and
short notice.
A sta_rred question ( distinguished by a n
asteri sk) requires an oral answe r a nd hence
s upplemenwry qu estions ca n fo ll ow.
An ul1starrcd question, o n the other hand ,
requires a wr itte n an swe r and he nce, suppl ementary qu esti ons ca n not fo ll ow.

,
I

Parliament

A short notice question is one that is
asked by giving a notice of less than ten days.
It is answered orally.
In addition to the ministers, the questions
can also be asked to the private members.
Thus, a quest ion may be addressed to a private member jfth~ subject matter of the question relates to some Bill, resolution or other
matter con n ected with the business of the
House for which that member is responsible.
The procedure in regard to such question is
the same as' that followed in the case of questions addressed to a m-inister.
The list of starred, ul1starred, short notice
questioris and questions to private m embers
are printed in green, white, light pink and
yellow colour, respectively, to distingui sh
tl"tem from one another.

Zero Hour
Unlike the question hour, the zero hour is not
mentioned in the Rules of Procedure. Thus it
is ~nl informal device available to the members
to raise various matters of urgent public importance. The zero hour starts immediately after
the qu~tion hour and lasts until the agenda for
the day.eie, regular business of the House) is
taken up. In other words, the time gap between
the question hour and the agenda is known as
zero hour. It is an Indian innovation in the fi eld
of parliamentary procedures an d has been in
existence since 1962.
" ! ~ :Jons

~\""~ iScussion on a matter of general public

im! ""i:ance can take place except on a motion
made , 'th the consent of the presiding officer. The House expresses its decisions or
opimons on various issues through the adoption or reJection of motions moved by either
ministers or private members.
The motions moved by the members to
raise discussions on various matters fall into
three principal categories:
1. Substantive Motion: It is a self-contained
independent proposal dealing with a
very important matter like impeachment

~ 241

of the President or removal of Chi ef
Election Commissioner.
2 . Substitute Motion: It is a motion that
is moved in substitution of an original
motion and proposes an alternative to
it. If adopted by the House, it supersedes
the original motion.
3 . Subsidiary Motion: It is a motion that,
by itself, has no meaning and cannot
state the decision of the Hou se without
reference to the original motion or proceedings of the House. It is divided into
three sub-categories:
(a) Ancillary Motion: It is used as the
regular way of proceeding with
various kinds of business.
(b) Superseding Morion: It is moved in the
course of debate on another issue
and seeks to supersede that issue.
(c) Amendment: It seeks to modify or
substitute only a part of the original motion.
Closure Motion It is a motion moved by a
member to cut short the debate on a matter
before the House. If the m otio n is approved
by the House, debate is stopped forthwith and
the. matter is put to vote. There are four kinds
of closure motions 14 ;
(a) Simple Closure: It is one when a member
moves that the 'matter having been sufficiently discussed be now put to vote'.
(b) Closure by Compartments: In this case, the
clauses of a bill or a lengthy resolution
are grouped into parts before the co mmen cement of the deba te. The debate
covers the part as a whole and the entire
part is put to vote.
(c) Kangaroo Closu re: Under thi s type, only
important clauses are taken up for
debate and voting and the intervening
clauses are skipped over and taken as
passed.
(d) Guillotine Closure: It is one when the
undiscussed clauses of a bill or a resolution are also put to vote along with the
14J.c. Johari: Indian Government and Politlcs, Vishal,

Volume II , Thirteenth Edition, 2001, p. 360.

242

f.7

Indian Polity

di scussed ones due to want of tim e (as
the time allotted for the di scussion is
ove r).
Privilege Motion It is co nce rn ed with the
breach of parliamentary pri vileges by a minister. It is moved by a member when he/ she
fee ls that a mini ster ha s co mmitted a brea ch
of privilege of th e House or one or more of its
members by with holding facts of a case or by
giving wrong o r di storted facts. Its purpose is
to ce nsure the con ce rned mini ster.
Calling Attention Motion It is introduced in
the Pa rlia m en t by a member to C<1. 11 the attention of a minister to a matter of urgent publi c
importan ce, and to seek a n authoritative stateme nt from him/ he r on that mattcr. Like the
ze ro hour, it is also an Indian innovation in
the parliamenta ry procedu re and has been in
existence since 1954. However, un like the zero
hour, it is mentioned in the Rules of Procedure.

Adjournment Motion It is introdu ced in the
Parliame nt to draw attention of the House
to a definite matter of urge nt public importance, and needs the support of 50 members
to be admitted. As it interrupts the normal
bus in ess of the Hou se, it is regard ed as an
extraord inary devi ce. It involves an element
of ce nsure agafnst the government and h ence
Raj ya Sabha is not perm itted to make use of
thi s dev ice. The discuss ion on an adjo urnment motion should last for not less than two
hours and thirty minutes.
The right to move a motion for an adjournment of the business of the House is subject
to the fo ll owing restrictions:
1. It should ra ise a matte r which is definite, fac tu a l, urge nt a nd of pub li c
importan ce;
2. It should not cover more than one matter;
3 . It should be restri cted to a speC ific matter
of rece nt occurrence and should not be
framed in gene ral term s;
4. It should not raise a question of privilege;
5. It should not revive di sc uss ion on a matte r that ha s bee n discussed in the sam e
sess ion;

6. It shou ld not deal with any matter that is
under adjudication by co urt; a nd
7. It should not raise any question that ca n
be rai sed on a di st inct motion.
No-Confidence Motion Article 75 of the
Con st ituti on says th at the cou ncil of ministers shall be co llectively responsible to the
Lok Sa bha. It mean s that the ministry stays
in office so lon g as it enjoys confidence of the
majority of the members of the Lok Sabha.
In other words, the Lok Sabha ca n remove
the mini stry from office by passing a noconfidence mot ion . The motion needs th e
support of 50 members to be admitted.
Confidence Motion The motion of confidence has co me up as a new procedura l
device to cope wit h th e emerging situations
of fractured ma ndates resulting in hung parliame nt, min ority governments and coalition
governments. The governments form ed with
wafer-thin majority have bee n ca ll ed upon by
the Preside nt to prove their majority on the
floor of the Ho use. The governme nt of the
day, so metim es, o n its own , see ks to prove its
majority by mov ing a motion of confidence
and winnin g the co nfidence of the House. If
the co n fide nce motion is negat ived, it results
in th e fall of the governm ent l5 .
Censure Motion A cen sure motion is different from a no-confide nce mot ion as shown
in 'nlble 23.2.
Motion of Thanks The fi rst session after each
general election and the first sess ion of every
fiscal year is addressed by the President. In thi s
address, the President outlines the policies and
programmes of the gove rnm ent in the preceding yea r a nd ensuing yea r. This address of th e
Presiden t, which corresponds to the 'speech
from the Throne in Britain', is discussed in
both the Houses of Parliament on a motion
ca lled th e 'Motion of Thanks'. At the end of
the di SCUSS ion, the motion is put to vote. This
15T K. Viswa nathan (Editor), The IIldian Parliamellf,
Lok Sabha Secretarial, Fourteenth Ed ition, 2011,

p. 21.

Parliament
Table 23.2

Censure Motion vs No Confidence Motion

Censure Motion
1.

2.

3.

4

~ 243

No-Confidence Motion

It should state the reasons for its adoption in the
Lok Sabha.

1.

It can be moved against an individual minister
or a group of ministers or the entire council of
ministers.

2.

It is moved for censuring the council of ministers
for specific policies and actions.

3.

If it is passed in the Lok Sabha, the council of
ministers need not resign from the office.

4.

motion must be passed in the House. Otherwise,
it amounts to the defeat of the government. This
inaugural speech of the President is an occasion available to the members of Parliament to
raise discussions and debates to examine and
criticise the government and administration
for its lapses and failures.
No-Day-Yet-Named Motion It is a motion
that has been admitted by the Speaker but
no date has been fixed for its discussion. The
Speaker, after considering the state of business in the House and in consultation with
the leader of the House or on the recommendation of the Business Advisory Committee,
allots a day or days or part of a day for the
discussion of such a motion.
Dilatory Motio n It is a motion for the
adjournment of the debate on a bill/ motion /
resolution etc. or a motion to retard or delay
the progress of a business under consideration
of the House. It can be moved by a member at
any time after a motion has been made. The
debate on a dilatory motion must be restricted
to the matter contained in such motion. If the
Speaker is of the opinion that such a motion
is an abuse of the rules of the House, he/she
may either forthwith put the question thereon
or decline to propose the question.

Point of Order
A member can raise a point of order when
the proceedings of the House do not follow

It need not state the reasons for its adoption in the
Lok Sabha.
tt can be moved against the entire council of ministers only.

It is moved for ascertaining the confidence of Lok
Sabha in the council of ministers.
If it Is passed in the Lok Sabha, the council of minislers must resign from office.

the normal ru les of procedure. A point of
order should relate to the interpretation
or enforcement of the Rules of the House
or such articles of the Constitution that
regulate the business of the House and
should raise a question that is within the
cognizance of the Speaker. It is usually
raised by an opposition member in order to
control the government. It is an extraordinary device as it suspends the proceedings
before the House. No debate is allowed on
a point of order.

Half-an-Hour Discussion
It is meant for discussing a matter of sufficient public importance, which has been
subjected to a lot of debate and the answer to
which needs elucidation on a matter of fact.
The Speaker can allot three days in a week for
such discussions. There is no formal motion
or voting before the House.

Short Duration Discussion
It is also known as two-hour discussion as the

time allotted for such a discussion should not
exceed two hours. The members of the Parliament can raise such discussions on a matter
of urgent public importance. The Speaker can
allot two days in a week for such discussions.
There is neither a formal motion before the
house nor voting. This device h as been in
existence since 1953.

244

P

Indian Polity

Special Mention
matter which is not a po int of orde r or
whi ch ca nn o t be rai sed du ri n g ques tion
hour, half-a n hour discuss ion, short duration
di scuss io n o r under adjo urnm ent moti o n ,
ca lli ng a ttention notice or under a ny rule
of the Hou se ca n be raised under the spec ia l
men tion in the Rajya Sabha. Its equivale n t
procedural dev ice in th e Lok Sa bha is known
as 'Notice ( Mention ) Under Rul e 3 77'.
A

Resolutions
A reso lut io n is a se lf-contained inde pend ent

proposa l submitted for the ap proval of the
House a nd drafted in such a way as to be
ca pable of ex pressing a decision of the House.
All reso lutions are substa ntive motions.
The m e mb ers ca n move reso lut io ns to
draw th e attention of the Hou se or th e
government to matte rs of gene ral publi c
interest. The di scuss io n o n a resolution is
stri ct ly releva nt to and wit hi n the sco pe of
the reso lution. A me mbe r who has moved
a reso lu tio n or amendment to a reso luti on
cannot withdraw the same except by leave of
the I-lou se.
A reso lu tio n may have the fo llowin g objectives:
( i) A d ec laration of opinion or a
reco m mendat io n.
10
record e ith er approva l or di sa pproval
( ii)
by th e I-louse of an act or poli cy of the
government.
( iii) Co nvey a message o r co mm end , urge or
request a n act ion .
( iv) Ca ll attent ion to a matter or situation for
co ns idera tion by the gove rnment.
Reso lu t ion s are classi fi ed into t hr ee
catego ries: 16
1. Pril'ate Member's Resolution: It is one
that is moved by a private memb er
(oth er than a mini ste r). It is discussed
only on a ltern ate Fridays a nd in the
afternoon s itting.
16 0 ictionary

or Co nstitutional and Parliam e ntary

Terms, Lok Sabha Secrctariat, Sccond Edi tion,
:WOS, pr. 396-97.

2. GOl'crnment Resolution: It is one that is
moved by a mini ster. It is of the following three kinds:
(a) Resolu tions a pprovin g international
treaties, co nve ntions or agreements
of whi ch the govern ment is a party.
(b) Resolut io ns decla ring or approving
certain poli cies of the governm ent.
(c) Resol utio ns approving recommendations of ce rtain co mmi ttees.
3. Statutory Resolution: It can be moved
eith er by a pri vate me mber or a mini ster. It is so ca ll ed beca use it is in pursuan ce of a provision in th e Constitution
or a n Act of Parliament.
Reso lu tions are di ffere nt from m ot ions in
the fo ll owi ng respects:
reso lutions co m e 111 the catego ry
of substa nt ive motion s, that is to say,
every reso lut io n is a particul ar type of
mot io n. All mot io ns need not necessa rily be su bstan tive. Furt her, all motion s
are not n ecessa ril y put to vote of the
Ho use, wh ereas a ll the reso lutions a rc
requi red to be vo ted upon .~17
~AlI

Youth Parliament
The sche me of Youth Parlia men t wa S started
0 11 the reco mmendation of the Fourth All
India Whips Co nfere nce. Its objectives are:
]. to acqua int the younger generations with
pra ctices and procedures of Parliament;
2. to imbibe the sp ir it of d isc ipline and
lO leran cc culti va ting chara cter in the
minds of yo uth ; and
3 . to in culcate in the student commun ity
the basic va lues of democracy a nd to
e nable them to acquire a proper perspecti ve on the function ing of democrati c
institutions.
Th e mini stry of pa rliamen tary affairs provides necessary tra inin g and encourageme n t
to the states in introdu cing the sc heme.
17Subhash C. K:lshya p: Our Parliament, Nu tional
Book Trust, 1999 Edition , p. 139.

. Parliament

LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE IN
PARLIAMENT
The legislative procedure is identical in both
the Hou ses of Parliament. Every bill h as to
pass through the same stages in each Ho.use.
f\ bill is a proposal fo r legislation a nd it
becomes an act or law when duly enacted.
The bills introduced in the Parliament are
of two kinds: public bills and private bills
(also kn own as government bills and private
members' bil1s respectively). Though both are
governed by the sa m e general procedure and
pass through the same stages in the House,
they differ in various respects as sh own in
Table 23.3.
Depending on their con tent, the bills may
further be classified into l 8 :
Cal Original bills (bills embodying new proposals, ideas or policies);
(b) Amending bills (bil1s which seek to modify, a mend or rev ise the existing Acts);
(e) Consolidating bills (bills which seek to
consolidate existing laws on a particul ar
subj ect);
(d) Expiring Laws (Continuance) bills (bills
to continu e an expiring Act);
(e) Repealing bills (bills seeking to repeal
, existing Acts);

~ 245

( f) Validating bills (bills which seek to give
validity to certai n actions).
(g) Bills to replace Ordinancesj
(h) Co nstitution (A m endmen t) bills; and
( i) Money a nd Financial bills.
On th e basis of procedure required for th eir
passage in the Parliam ent, the bills can also
be broadly classified into the following four
types:
1. Ordinary bills, which are co n ce rn ed
with any m atter other th an financial
subj ects.
2. Money bills, which are con cerned with
the fin anci al matters like taxation, pub~
li c expenditure, etc.
3. Financial bills, which are also concerned
with financial matters (but are different
from money bills).
4. Constitution amendment bills, which are
con cerned with the amendment of the
provisions of the Co nstitution .
The Constitution has laid down separate
procedures for the enactment of.all the four
types of bills, The procedures with regard to
ordin ary bills, money bills and financial bills
are explained here. The procedure with regard
to Constitution amendment bills is already
explained in deta il.
;

Table 23.3 Public Bm vs Private Bill

-

Public Bill

Private Bill

1. It is Introduced in the Parliament by a minister.

1. It is Introduced by any member of Parliament other
than a minister.

2. It reflects of the policies of the government.

2. It does not reflect the stand of government on public
matter.

3. It has greater chance to be approved by the
Parliament.

3. It has lesser chance to be approved by the
Parliament.

. Its rejection by the House amounts to the expression of want of parliamentary confidence in the
,
government and may lead to Its resignation.

4. Its rejection by the House has no Implication on the
parliamentary confidence In the government or its
resignation.

5. Its introduction in the House requires seven days'
notice,

5. Its introduction in the House requires one month's
notice.

~,.....-

......,._.

~

.

.- - -.,.-

,~

-

6. It is drafted by the concerned department.ln con·
sultation with the law department.

6, Its drafting is the responsibility of the member
concerned.

18 An Introduction to Parliament of India , Rajya Sabha Secretariat, fourth edition , 2007, p. 24.

246

,(1 Indian Polity

Ordinary Bills
Eve ry ordin a ry bill has to pass throu gh the
fo llowing fi ve stages in the Pa rlia men t befo re
it find s a p lace on th e Statute Book:
I. First Read ing An ordina ry bill ca n be
introdu ced in e ith e r House of Pa rli am e n t.
Such a biB ca n b e introdu ced eithe r by a m iniste r or by a ny othe r me mbe r. The me mbe r
who wa nts to introduce t he bill has to ask fo r
the leave of the House. When the House grants
leave to introduce the bill, the mover of the bill
introduces it by reading its title and objectives.
No d iscuss ion on the b ill takes place at th is
stage. Later, the bill is publish ed in the Gazette
of India. If a bill is publish ed in the Gazette
before its introduction , leave of t he House to
in troduce the bill is not necessary, I9 The introdu ction of the b ill a nd its publication in t he
Gazette constitute the first readin g of the bill.

2. Second Read ing Durin g this stage, the
bill rece ives not only th e gen era l but a lso the
deta iled scru ti ny a nd assum es its fi na l sha pe.
He nce, it for ms the most importa nt stage in
the en actment of a bil l. In fa ct, th is stage
involves three more sub-sta ges, namely, stage
of ge neral discussion , commi ttee stage and
conside ration stage.
Th e p rin ted
copi es of the bill a re distribu ted to a ll t he
me mb ers. The princi ples of the bill a nd its
provis io ns a re discussed gen era lly, but the
deta il s of th e bill are n ot discussed .
At th is stage, the House ca n ta ke a nyo ne
of th e following four actions:
(i) It may ta ke the bill in to con sideratio n
immediately or on some othe r fixed date;
(ii) It may refer the bill to a select co mm ittee
of th e House;

(a) Stage a/General Discussion

' 9Under Rule 64 of Lok Sabha, the Speaker may, on

request being made to him, order the publication
of any bill in the Gazette, although no motio n has
bee n made for leave to introduce the bill. In that
case, it shall not be necessary to move fo r leave to
in troduce the bill and if the bill is afterwards introduced, it shall not be necessary to publish it aga in.

( ii i) It may refer th e bill to a join t committee
of th e two Hou ses; a nd
(iv) It may ci rcul ate the b ill to elici t publi c
opinio n .
A Sel ect Committee co nsists of members of
the House where the b i1l h as originated a nd a
join t committee co n sists of me mbers of b oth
th e Hou ses of Parlia me n t.

T h e usual practi ce is
to refe r th e b ill to a select co mm ittee of the
Hou se. Thi s committee exa min es t h e bill
th o roughl y a nd in deta il , cla u se by cl a use.
It ca n a lso a m en d its provisio n s, bu t wi t hout
a ltering th e p r in c ip les und e rly in g it. After
co mpl e tin g th e sc rutiny and di sc u ss io n ,
t h e co mm it tee re por ts th e bill b ack to th e
Ho use.

(b) Committee Stage

(c) Consideration Stage The Hou se, after

receiving the bill fro m th e select committee,
co nsiders the provis io ns of t he bill cla use by
cl a use. Each clause is discussed a nd voted
upon separately. Th e membe rs ca n a lso move
a me ndm e nts a n d if accepted, they becom e
pa rt of th e bi ll.
3. Third Reading At this stage, th e debate
is co nfined to the accep ta n ce or rejection of
th e bill as a wh ole a nd no a m endm e nts a re
a llowed l as the gen era l prin cipl es unde rly ing
t he bill have a lready bee n sc ru tinised during
the stage of second read ing. If the maj ority of
me mbe rs p'r esent a n d voti ng accept t he b ill ,
the bill is rega rded as passed by the House.
T hereafte r, t he bi ll is a uth en ticated by the
presiding office r of the House a nd tra n smitted to the second House fo r co n siderat ion
a nd a pprova L A bill is dee med to have bee n
passed by t he Parlia me nt o nly whe n both
th e Ho uses have agreed to it , e ithe r with or
with out a m e ndm e nts.
4 . Bill in the Second House In th e second
House also, the bill passes through a ll th e
three stages, that is, first read ing, seco nd
rea ding a nd third reading. There a re four
alterna ti ves be fore this House:
(a) it may pass the bil1 as sent by the first
house ( ie, with out a me ndm en ts);

Parliament

(b) it may pass the bill with amen dmen ts
and return it to the first House for
recon sidera tion;
(e) it may reject the bill altoge ther; and
(d) it may not take any action and thus keep
the bill pendi ng.
If the secon d House passes the bill witho ut
any amend ments or the first House accepts the
amend ments sugges ted by the secon d House,
the bill is deeme d to have been passed by both
the Houses and the same is sent to the President
for his/ her assent . On the other hand, if the
first House rejects the amend ments suggested
by the secon d House or the secon d House
rejects the bill altoge ther or the secon d House
does not take any action for six month s, a deadlock is deeme d to have taken place. '1b resolve
such a deadlock, the Presid ent can summ on a
joint sitting of the two Houses. If the major ity
of memb ers presen t and voting in the joint
sitting approves the bill, the bill is deeme d to
have been passed by both the Houses.
5. Assen t of the President Every bill after
being passed by both House s of Parlia ment
either singly or at a joint sitting , is presen ted
to the Presid ent for his/ her assent . There are
three altern atives before the Presid ent:
(a) he/ she may give his/he r assent to the
bill; or
.
(h) he / she may withh old his/ her assen t to
the bill; or
(e) he/ she may return the bill for recons ideratio n of the Houses.
If the Presid ent gives his/ her assen t to the
bill, the bill becom es an act and is placed on
the Statut e Book. If the Presid ent withh olds
his/ her assen t to the bill, it ends and does
not beco~e an act. If the Presid ent return s
the bill for recon sidera tion and if it is passed
by both the House s again with or witho ut
amen dm ents and presen ted to the Presid ent
for his/ her assen t, the Presid ent must give
his/ her assent to the bill. Thus, the Presid ent
enjoy s only a "suspe nsive veto."

.

Money Bill.
Articl e 110 of the Const itutio n deals with the
defini tion of mone y bills. It states that a bill

'tt 247

is deeme d to be a mone y bill if it conta ins
'only' provis ions dealin g with all or any of
the follow ing matte rs:
1. The impos ition, abolit ion, remis sion,
altera tion or regula tion of any tax;
2. The regula tion of the borrow ing of mone y
by the Union gover nment ;
3. The custod y of the Conso lidate d Fund of
India or the contin gency fund of India,
the paym ent of mone ys into or the withdrawal of mone y from any such fund;
4. The appro priati on of mone y out of the
Conso lidate d Fund of India;
5. Decla ration of any expen diture charg ed
on the Conso lidate d Fund of India or
increa sing the amou nt of any su ch
expen diture ;
6. The receip t of money on accou nt of the
Conso lidated Fund of India or the public
accou nt of India or the custody or issue of
such money, or the audit of the accou nts
of the Union or of a state; or
7. Any matte r incide ntal to any of the matters specif ied above.
However, a bill is not to be deeme d to be a
mone y bill by reason only that it provid es for:
1. the impos ition of fines or other pecun iary
penal ties, or
2. the dema nd or paym ent of fees for
licens es or fees for servic es rende red; or
3. the impos ition, abolit ion, remis sion,
altera tion or regula tion of any tax by any
local autho rity or body for local purposes.
If any questi on arises wheth er a bill is a
mone y bill or not, the decisi on of the Speak er
of the Lok Sabha is final. His/ her decisi on in
this regard canno t be questi oned in any court
of law or in the either House of Parlia ment or
even the Presid ent. When a money bill is transmitted to the Rajya Sabha for recom mend ation
and presen ted to the Presid ent for assent, the
Speaker endor ses it as a money bill.
The Const itutio n lays down a specia l procedur e for the passin g of mone y bills in the
Parlia ment. A mone y bill can only be introduced in the Lok Sabha and that top on the
recom mend ation of the Presid ent. Every such
bill is consid ered to be a gover nmen t bill and
can be introd uced only by a minis ter.

,

248 P'od,oo Polity
After a mo ney b ill is pa ssed by the Lok
Sabha, it is transm itted to the Rajya Sabha
for its cons ide rat io n . T he R..:'ljya Sabha has
restr icted powers with regard to a mon ey
bi ll. It ca nn ot reject or amen d a money bi ll.
It ca n only make th e reco mm en dations. It
must return the bill to t he Lok Sabha within
14 days, whether with or withou t recommenda tions. Th e Lok Sabha ca n e it he r accept or
reject a ll or any of the recomm e ndati ons of
the Rajya Sab ha .
If the Lok Sabha accepts any recommen dation, the bill is then deemed to have been
passed by both the Houses in the modified
form . If th e Lok Sabha does not accept any
reco mmendatio n , the b ill is the n deemed to
have passed by both the Houses in the form
origin a lly passed by the Lok Sabha without
any cha nge.
Tab le 23.4

If the Rajya Sa bha does not return the
bill to t he Lok Sabha within 14 days, th e bill
is dee med to have been passed by both the
Houses in the for m origi na ll y passed by the
Lok Sabha. Thus, the Lok Sab ha has more powers tha n Raj ya Sabha with regard to a money
bill. On the other hand, both the Houses have
equa l powers with regard to a n ordin ary bill.
Fi nally, whe n a money bill is prese nted to
the Presi dent, he/ she may eithe r g ive his/
he r asse nt to th e bill or wi t hhold h is/ her
assent to th e bill but cannot return t he bill
for reco n si de ratio n of the Houses. Nor ma ll y,
the President gives his/ he r asse nt to a money
bill as it is introdu ced in the Pa rli a me nt with
his/ he r pri or pe rmission.
Thb le 23.4 shows the diffe rences between
t he procedures fo r the enactm e nt of ordinary
bi ll s and m on ey bills.

Ordinary Bill vs Money Bill

Ordinary Bill

Money Bill

1. II can be Introduced either In the l ok Sabha or the
Rajya Sabha.

1. it can be introduced only in the l ok Sabha and
not in the Rajya Sabha.

2. It can be Introdut::ed either by a minister Of by a prj.
vate member.

2. It can be Intlodllced only by • minister.

3. It Is introduced without the recommendation of the
President.

3. It can be Introduced only on the recommendation
of the President.

4. It can be amended or rejected by the Rajya Sabha.

4. It cannot be amended or rejected by the RaJye
Sebha, The Rawa 5abha should retum the bPI
wtth or without recommendations. which may be
accepted or rejected by the Lok Sabha.

5. It can be detained by the Rajya Sabha for a maximum

5. It can be detained by the Rajya Sabha for a maxi-

period of six months.

6. It does not require the certification of the Speaker
when transmitted to the Raga Sabha (If it has orIginsted In the lok Sabha).

mum period of 14 days only.

6. It requires the cerUflcaUon of the Speaker when
transmlned to the Rajya Sabha.

7. It Is sent for the President's assent only after being
approved by both the Houses. In case of a deadlock
due to disagreement between the two Houses, a joint
sitting of both the houses can be summoned by the
President to resolve the deadlock.

7. It is sent for the President's assent even If It Is
approved by only lok Sabha. There is no chance
of any disag reement between the two Houses
and hence, there is no provision of joint sitti ng of
both the Houses in this rega rd.

·S. its defeat in the lok Sabha may lead to the resignation

S. Its defeat in the lok Sabha leads to the reSlgne-

of the govemment (If it is Introduced by a minister).

9. It can be approved or rejected or returned for reconslderation by the President.

tlon of the government.

9. It can be approved or rejected but cannot be
returned for reconsideration by the President.

Parliament

Financial Bills
Financial bills are those bills that deal with
fiscal matters, that is, revenue or expenditure. However, the Const ituti on uses the term
'financial bill' in a technical sense. Financial
bills are of three kinds:
1. Money bills- Article 110
2. Financial bills (I)-Article 11 7 ( I )
3. Financial bills ( II)-Article 117 (3)
This classification implies that mon ey
biBs a re simply a species of financial bills.
Hence, all money bills are financial bills but
all financial biBs are not money bills. Only
those financial bi11s are money bills which
contain exclusively those matters which are
mentioned in Article 110 of the Constitution.
These are also certified by the Speaker of Lok
Sabha as money bills. The financial bills (I)
and (II), on th e other hand, have been dealt
with in Article 117 of the Constitution .

Financial Bills (I) A financial bill ( I) is a
bill that contai ns not only any or all the matters mentioned in Article 110, but also other
matters of general legislati on. For instance,
a bill that con tains a borrowing clause, but
does not exclusively deal with borrowing. In
two resp~cts, a financial bill (I) is simila r
to a money bill -(a) both of them ca n be
introdu ced only in the Lok Sabha and not
in the Rajya Sabha, and (b) both of them
ca n be introduced only on the recommendation of the Pres ident. In all other respects,
a financiai bill (1) is governed by the sa me
legislative procedure applicable to an ordi nary bill. Hence, it ca n be either rejected
or amended by the Rajya Sabha (except that
an amendment other than for redu ctio n
or abo1ition of a tax cannot be moved in
the Rajya Sabha or in the Lok Sab ha without the recomme ndation of the President
i.e., the recommendation of President is
not required for moving an amendment
making proviSion for the reduction or abolition of a tax). In case of a disagreement
between the two Houses over such a bill, the
President can summon a joint Sitti ng of the
two Houses to resolve the deadlock. When
the bill is presented to the President, he/ she

'!1 249

can either give his/ her assent to the bilI or
withhold his/ her assent to the bill or return
the bill for reco n siderati on of the Houses.

Financial Bitts (II) A financial bill (II) contains provisions involving expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India, but does not
include any of the matters mentioned in
Article 110. It is treated as an ordinary bill
and in all respects, it is governed by the same
legislative procedure which 'is applicable to
an ordinary bill. The only special feature of
this bill is that it can not be passed by either
House of Parliament unless the President has
recommended to that House the consideration of the bill, Hence, financial bill (11) can
be introduced in either House of Parliament
and recommendation of the President is
not necessary for its introduction, In other
words, the recommendation of the President
is not required at the introduction stage but is
required at the consi deration stage. It cim be
either rejected or amended by either House
of Parliament. In case of a .disagreement
between the two Houses over such a bill, the
President can sum mon a joint sittin g of
the two Houses to resolve the deadlock. When
the bill is presented to the President, he/ sh e
can either give his/ her assent to the bill or
withhold hi s/her assent to the bill or return
the bill for reconsideration of the Houses.

~ JOINT SITTING OF TWO HOUSES
Joint sitting is an extraordinary machinery
provided by the Constitution to resolve a deadlock between the two Houses over the passage
of a bill. A deadlock is deemed to have taken
place under a nyone of the following three
situations after a bill has been passed by one
House and transmitted to the other House:
1. if the bill is rejected by the other House;
2. if the Houses have finally di~greed as to
the ame ndments to be made in the bill;
or
3. if more than six month s have elapsed
from the date of the receipt of the bill by
the other House without the bill being
passed by it.

250 ,(! Indian Palily
In t he above t hree situat ion s, the Pres ide nt can summ on both the Ho uses to meet
in a joi nt s itting for t he purpo se of de libe rati ng a nd voting on the bill. It mu st be
n oted he re that the provi sion of joint sitt ing
is a ppl ica bl e to ordin ary bills or financ ial
bills on ly and not to mone y bills or Con stituti onal ame ndm e n t bills. In the case of
a mone y bi1l , th e Lok Sabha ha s overri ding
powe rs, wh il e a Co n st itu tional amen dmen t
b ill must be pa ssed by each I-louse separa tely.
In recko ning the period of six month s, n o
acco un t ca n be ta ken of any pe r iod durin g
whi c h t he other House (to which t he bill
has been se nt) is prorog ued or adjou rned for
m ore than four co nsecu tive days.
Lf the bi l1 ( under di s pute) has a lread y
lapsed du e to the di sso lution of the Lok
Sa bha, no j oi n t si tting ca n be su mmon ed .
But, the joint sitting can be he ld if t he Lok
Sab ha is dissol ved after th e Pres ide nt has
notifi ed hi s/ her i ntenti on to summ on such
a s ittin g (as t he bill does n ot lapse in th is
case). After th e Pres ident notifi es hi s/ h er
intent ion to su mmon a joi n t si ttin g of t he
two House s, none of th e House s ca n proce ed
furthe r with th e bill.
Th e Speak er of Lo k Sa bha pres ides over a
joi nt s itting of the two House s and the Depu ty
Spea ker, i n hi s/ he r absen ce. If the Depu ty
Speak e r is a lso absen t from a joint sitting , the
De puty Chair man of Rajya Sa bha presides. rf
he/ she is also absen t, such other perso n as
may be determ ined by the memb ers presen t at
th e joint s itting, presid es over the meetin g. It
is d ear that the Chair man of Rajya Sabha does
not preside over a joint sitting as he/ she is not
a me mber of either House of Parlia ment.
The quoru m to consti tute a join t sitting is
one-te nth of the total numb er of memb ers of
the two House s. T he joint sitting is gover ned
by the Rul es of Procedure of Lok Sab ha and
not of Rajya Sabha .
If the bilJ in di spute is passed by a majori ty of
the total numb er of memb ers of both the House s
presen t and voti ng in the joint sitting, th e bilJ is
deem ed to have been passed by both the Houses.

No rma lly, the Lok Sabha wi th greate r numbe r
wi ns the battle in a join t sitting.
The Co nstitu tion has specif ied that a t a
jo int si ttin g, new amen d men ts to th e b ill
ca nn ot be propo sed excep t in two cases:
1. those a mend m en ts that have ca used fi na l
d isagre ement betwe e n t he Houses; a nd
2. t h ose amen dmen ts t hat migh t ha ve
becom e necess a ry due to the de lay in
the passa ge of the bill.
Sin ce 1950, the prov isio n regard ing the
joi nt si tting of th e two Hou ses has bee n
in voked only thri ce. The bills that have been
passed at joint sittings a rc:
20
1. DOWTY Prohi bition Bill, 1960.
2. Banki ng Servic e Co mmi ssio n ( Repea l )
21
Bill , 1977.
22
3. Preve ntion of Terror i sm Bill, 2002.

~ BUD GET IN PARLIAMENT
The Con stituti on refers to t he budge t as the
'a nnual fi na ncia l state men t'. In other words,
the term 'budge t' has nowhere been used in
th e Co nstitu tion. It is the popul ar name fo r the
'a nnual fin a ncia l statem e nt' tha t has bee n de.:'l lt
with in Articl e 112 of the Co nstitu tion .
Th e budge t is a sta temen t of t he estima ted
receip ts and exp e nditure of t he Gover nmen t
of In dia in a finan cia l year, which begin s on
1 April a nd e nds on 31 March of the fo ll owing yea r.
In a dditio n to th e est im a tes of receip ts
an d exp e nditure, the budge t conta ins certai n
other e le ments . Overa ll , the budge t contai ns
the follow i ng:
] . Est imates of revenu e a nd ca pit.:'lI receipts;
2 . Ways a nd means to rai se th e revenu e;
200y-he Lok Sabha did not agree lO (he amend ments
made by the R.."ljya 5.:1 bha. A joint s iting was he ld
on 6 May 1961.
21The bill wa s passed by the Lok Sab ha but rejecte d
by the Rajya Snbha . A joint sitting was he ld o n 16
May 1978.
22.yhe bill was passed by the Lok Sa bha but rejecte d
by the Rajya 5."lbha. A joint sitting was he ld o n 26
March 2002. The b ill was passed when 425 m em ..
bers voted for it and 296 against .

Parliament

f

I
1,

r

,

·

,
I.
11

r

·

'(
t

'.

f
.,

I

'.

· ,!

,I

>

,I

3. Estimates of expenditure;
4. Details of the actual receipts and expenditure of the closing financial year and
the reasons for any deficit or surplus in
that year; and
5. Economic and financial policy of the coming year, that is, taxation proposals, pros-

pects of revenue, spending programme
and introduction of new schemes/ projects.

Merger of Railway Budllet
Till 2017, the Government .of India had two
budgets, namely, the Railway Budget and the
General Budget. While the fonner consisted of
the estimates of receipts and expenditures of
only the Ministry of Railways, the latter consisted of the estimates of receipts and expenditure of all the ministries of the Government
of India (except the railways).
The Railway Budget was separated from
the General Budget in 1924 on the recommendations of the Acworth Committee Report
(1921). The reasons or objectives of this separation were as follows:
1. 1b introduce flexibility in railway finance.
2. 1b facilitate a business approach to the
railway policy.
3. 1b secure stability of the general revenues
by providing an assured annual contribution from railway revenues.
4. 1b enable the railways to keep their profits for their own development (after
paying a fixed annual contribution to
the genera] revenues).
In 2017, the Central Government merged
the railway budget into the general budget.
Hence, there is now only one budget for
the Government of India i.e., Union Budget.

Constitutional Provisions
The Constitution of India contains the following provisions with regard to the enactment
of budget'
1. The President shall in respect of every
financial year cause to be laid before
both the Houses of Parliament a statement of estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for that
year (Article 112).

~ 251

2. No demand for a grant shall be made
except on the recommendation of the
President (Article 113).
3. No money shall be withdrawn from the
Consolidated Fund of India except under
appropriation made by law (Article 114).
4. No money bill imposing tax shan be
introduced in the Parliament except on
the recommendation of the President,
and such a bill shall not be introduced
in the Rajya Sabha (Article 117).
5. No tax shaH be levied or collected except
by authority of law (Article 265).
6. Parliament can reduce or abolish a tax
but cannot increase it (Article 117).
7. The Constitution has also defined the
relative roles or position of both the
Houses of Parliament with regard to
the enactment of the budget in the
following way:
(a) A money bill or finance bill dealing
with taxation cannot be introduced
in the Rajya Sabha-it must be
introduced only in the Lok Sabha
(Article 109).
(b) The ~jya Sabha has no power to vote
on the demand for grants; it is the
exclusive privilege of the Lok Sabha
(Article 113).
(e) The Rajya Sabha should return the
Money bill (or Finance bill) to the
Lok Sabha withiI1- fourteen days.
The Lok Sabha can either accept
or reject the recommendations
made by Rajya Sabha in this regard
(Article 109).
8. The estimates of expenditure embodied
in the budget shall show separately the
expenditure charged on the Consolidated
Fund of India and the expenditure made
from the Consolidated Fund of India
(Article 112).
9. The budget shall distinguish expenditure
on revenue account from other expenditure (Article 112).
10. The expenditure charged on the
Consolidated Fund of India shall not
be submitted to the vote of Parliament.

252

P

Indian Polity

Howev e r, it ca n be d iscuss ed by th e
Parl iam ent (Artic l e 11 3).
11 . Th e Lok Sabha ca n appro ve o r refuse any
de mand or red uce the am o unt specif ied
in the dema nd bu t ca nnot increa se it
(A rticl e 11 3).
12. No such a m en d m e nt ca n be pro posed to
the a pprop riat ion bill in e ithe r Hou se of
th e Parlia ment t hat will have th e effect
of vary in g the a mou nt or a lte r ing t he
destin ation of any grant vo ted, or of
varyin g the a moun t of any ex pe ndi ture
chang ed on th e Co nso lidate d F'und of
Indi a ( Articl e 11 4).
13. T he Lok Sa blw ca n m a ke a ny g ran t in
adva nce (Vote on Acco unt ) in respec t to
the est imate d ex pen diture for a part of
the financ i a l year, pendi ng the co mp le·
tion of th e vot ing of rh e de mand s for
g ra nts a nd t he e na ctm e nt of the app ro·
pri atio n bill (A r ticle 11 6).

Charg ed Expe nditu re
The budge t co ns ists of two types of ex pe nditu re -the expe nditure 'charg ed' upon the Consol idated Fund of Indi a a nd the expen d it ure
' made' from the Con sol ida ted Fund of In dia.
T he cha rged ex pendi ture is no n-vota bl e by th e
Parlia ment, that is, it ca n o nl y be disc ussed
by the Parlia ment, while th e other type has
to be voted by the Parlia m e nt. Th e li st of the
c harged expen dit ure is as fo llows:
1. Emo lume nts and allow ances o f the
Presi dent a nd other ex pendi ture relatin g
to his/ her o ffi ce.
2. Sa la ries a nd al1 0wanc es of the Chair man
and the De pu ty Cha irm an of the Raj ya
Sabha a nd the Spea ke r an d the De puty
Speak er of the Lo k Sa bha.
3 . Salari es, a ll owanc es a nd pensio ns of the
judge s of the Sup reme Co urt.
4 . Pen sions of the judges of hig h courts.
5. Sa lary, a ll owanc es an d pensio n of t he
Comp troller and Audito r Gener al of Indja.
6. Salari es, allowa nces a nd pensio n of the
ch airma n and m e mbers of the Uni on
Publi c Se rvi ce Co mmi ss io n .

7. Admin i stra tive expen ses of the Supre m e
Co u rt, t h e office of t h e Co mptro ll e r
a nd Audit or Ge n e ral of Ind ia and th e
Uni o n Publi c Se rv i ce Co mmis sio n
includ ing th e sa lari es, a ll owanc es a nd
pe n sio n s of t h e pe rso ns se rving i n
these offi ces.
8. T h e d e bt c h arges for whic h the
Gove rnm e nt of India is li ab le, in cl uding intere st, sinkin g fund charg es and
redem ption c ha rges and othe r ex pe nd i·
ture relati ng to the rai sin g of loa ns and
th e servic e a nd redem p ti o n of debt.
9. Any sum required to sa tisfy any j udgement, dec ree or award of an y court or
arb itra l tribun al.
10. Any othe r expen d itu re declar ed by the
Parlia m e nt to be so charged.

Stage s in Enac tmen t
The budge t goes throug h t he fo ll ow i ng six
stages in the Parli a me nt:
1. Presen tation of budge t.
2. Gener a l discus s ion .
3. Sc rutin y by de partm e n ta l comm ittees.
4. Voti ng o n de mand s for gra n ts.
5. Pass ing of appro priat io n bill.
6 . Pa ss ing of financ e bill.

1. Prese ntat ion of Bud get Conve ntio na lly,
t he budge t is prese n ted to the Lok Sa bha by
the finan ce minis te r o n the last wo rking day
of Febru ary. Si nce 20 17, the p rese n tatio n
of th e budge t ha s bee n adva nced to 1st o f
Febru ary.
T he Budge t ca n a lso be prese n ted to t he
Ho use in two or more parts an d when suc h
prese ntati o n takes pla ce, eac h part sha ll be
dea lt with as if it were the budge t. Fu rt her,
the re sha ll be no di sc uss io n of th e budge t
on the day o n which it is presen ted to the
House .
The financ e mini ste r prese nts the budge t
with a speec h known as th e 'budge t speec h '.
At the e nd of the speech in th e Lo k Sabha , th e
budge t is la id before th e R.,1j ya Sa bh a, whi c h
ca n on ly discus s it a nd has no powe r to vote
0 11 th e dema nds for g rants.

Parliament

,)

The budget documents presented to the
22a
Parliament comprise of the following :
(i) Budget Speech
(ii) Annual Financial Statement
(iii) Demands for Grants
(iv) Finance Bill
(v) Statements mandated under the FRBM
Act 22b :
(a) Macro-Economic Framework
Statement
(b) Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement
(c) Medium Term Fiscal Policy
Statement
(vi) Expenditure Budget
(vii) Receipts Budget
(viii) Expenditure Profile
(ix) Memorandum Explaining the Provisions
in the Finance Bill
(x) Budget at a Glance
(xi) Outcome Budget (Output Outcome
Monitoring Framework)
(xii) Key Features of the Budget
(xiii) Implementation of Previous Budget
Announcements
(xiv) Key to Budget Documents
Earlier, the Economic Survey also used to
be presented to the Parliament along with the
budget. Now, it is presented one day or a few
days before the presentation of the budget. This
report is prepared by the finance ministry and
indicates the status of the national economy.

2. General Discussion The general discussion on budget begins a few days after its presentation. It takes place in both the Houses
of Parliament and lasts usually for three to
four days.
During this stage, the Lok Sabha can discuss the budget as a whole or on any question of principle involved therein but no cut
motion can be moved nor can the budget
22a Bu dget Manual , Ministry of Finance, Government
of India, November 2022, pp. 2- 3.
221lrhe Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 2003 was enacted to provide for the responsibiity of the central government to ensure
inter-generational equity in fiscal management
and long-term macro-economic stability.

~ 253

be submitted to the vote of the House. The
finance minister has a general right of reply
at the end of the discussion.
3. Scrutiny by Departmental Committees
After the general discussion on the budget
is over, the Houses are adjourned for about
three to four weeks. During this gap period,
the 24 departmental standing committees of
Parliament examine and discuss in detail the
demands for grants of the concerned ministers and prepare reports on them. These
reports are submitted to both the Houses of
Parliament for consideration.
The standing committee system established in 1993 (and expanded in 2004) makes
parliamentary financial control over ministries much more detailed, close, in-depth and
comprehensive.
4. Voting on Demands for Grants In the light
of the reports of the departmental standing
committees, the Lok Sabha takes up voting
of demands for grants. The demands are presented ministrywise. A demand becomes a
grant after it has been duly voted.
Two points should be noted in this context.
One, the voting of demands for grants is the
exclusive privilege of the Lok Sabha, that is,
the Rajya Sabha has no power of voting the
demands. Second, the voting is confined to
the votable part of the budget-the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of
India is not submitted to the vote (it can only
be discussed).
Each demand is voted separately by the Lok
Sabha. During this stage, the members of Par·
liament can discuss the details of the budget.
They can also move motions to reduce any
demand for grant. Such motions are called as
'cut motion', which are of three kinds:
It represents the
disapproval of the policy underlying the
demand. It states that the amount of the demand be reduced to 't1. The members can also
advocate an alternative policy.

(a) Policy Cut Motion

(b) Economy Cut Motion

It represents the

economy that can be affected in the proposed
expenditure. It states that the amount of the

254

Jt!

Indian Polity

demand be reduced by a specifi ed amount
(which may be either a lumpsum reduction
in the demand or om mi ss ion or redu ction of
an ite m in the de mand).
It ve n tilates a spec ifi c
grievance that is wi thin the sphere of responsibility of the Government of Indi a . It states
tha t the a mount of the dem an d be redu ced
by ~lOO .
A cut motion , to be admiss ible, 111ust sati sfy
the following conditions:
(i) It should re late to on e demand onl y.
(ii) It should be c learl y expressed a nd
should not c onta in a rgum e nt s o r
defamatory statem e nts.
(iii) It should be confined to o ne spec ific
matter.
(iv) It should not make suggest ion s for t he
am endm e nt or repea l of ex isting la ws.
(v) it should not re fe r to a ma tte r that is
not prim ari1 y the con cern of Union
government.
(vi) It should not relate to the expe nditure
charged on the Con solidated Fund of
India.
(vii) It should not re late to a matte r that is
under a dj udication by a co urt.
(viii) rt should not rai se a que s tion o f
pri vil ege.
Th e signi fica nce of a cut motion lies in:
(a ) fa cilitating the initiation of con centra ted
discuss ion on a specifi c demand for grant;
and (b) upholding th e principl e of responsible governm e nt by probing t he acti viti es of
the government. However, th e c ut motion do
not have much utili ty in pra cti ce. Th ey are
onl y moved a nd di scussed in th e Hou se but
not passed as the governm ent e njoys majority support. Their passage by the Lok Sabha
amounts to the express ion s of want of parli ame ntary confiden ce in th e gove rnm e nt a nd
may lead to its res igna tion .
On the la st day of the da ys allotte d for di scussion and voting on the demands for grants,
th e Sp eaker puts a ll the rem a inin g de mands
to vote and disposes them wheth er they have
been discussed by the members o r not. Thi s
is known a s 'guillotine'.

(c) Token Cut Motion

5. Passing of Appropriation Bill Th e
Con stituti on states that ' no mon ey sh a ll
be withdrawn from th e Con solidate d Fund
of India exce pt unde r appropri a tion made
by law'. Accordingl y, afte r the demands for
gra nts a re vot ed on and pa ssed by the Lok
Sabha , a n appropri a tion bill is introdu ced
to provid e for th e appropriation , o ut o f th e
Con so lidated Fund of Indi a , of all money
required to meet:
(a) T he gra nts voted by the Lok Sabha.
(b) Th e ex penditure c har ged on th e
Con solidated Fund of India .
No such am e ndment ca n be proposed to
th e approp riation bill in e ithe r hou se of the
Parli a m e nt th a t will have th e effect of va ryin g th e a mount o r a ltering th e destinat io n of
a ny gra nt voted, or of va ry i ng the a mou nt of
any ex penditure c ha rged on th e Co nsolida ted
fund of India.
The Appropriation Bill becom es the Appropriati o n Act afte r it is assented to by the
Preside nt. This a ct authori ses (o r Jegali ses)
th e pay ments from th e Con solidated Fund of
Indiil . Thi s mea ns that th e governm e nt cannot withdraw mo ney from th e Con so lida ted
Fund of Indi a tm th e en actment of the a ppropria tion hill . Thi s takes tim e a nd usua ll y goes
o n till th e end of Apr il. But th e gove rnment
needs mo ney to ca rry on its norm a l acti vit ies after 31 Marc h (the end of th e fin a nci a l
year). Th ove rcom e thi s fun ction a l diffi c ulty,
the Constitution has a uthorised the Lok Sabha
to make a ny gra nt in a dvan ce in respect to
th e estimated ex penditure for a pa rt of th e
fin a nci al year, p e nding the compl etio n of
th e vot ing of the de mands for grants and the
e nactmen t of t he appropriation bill. Thi s provision is known as th e 'Vote on Account'. It is
passed (or granted) afte r the ge neral di sc ussion on budget is ove r. It is ge n era ll y gra nted
for two mo nth s fOT an amount equi va le nt to
on e-sixth o f th e tota l estimati on .
In a n e lecti on yea r ( whe n the Lok Sabha
is to be di ssol ved or a new Lok Sabha is constituted), th e Vote on Account may be take n
fo r a longer period (for about 3 to 5 months).
from 201 7 onwa rd s, th e Budge t sess ion
is a dvan ced to 31st January and th e Union

r,
l

Parliament

Budget is presented on 1st February, almost
a month ahead of the usual date -in the past.
This change is intended to enable the Parliament to avoid a Vote on Account and pass a
single Appropriation Bill for the year, before
the close of the financial year.
- After the advancement of budg~t cycle
from the last day of February to the first day
of February, the Vote on Account is presented
in the election year when Interim Budget is
presented.
In the year in which General Elections to
the Lok Sabha are held, the Interim Budget
is presented to the Parliament. After the
General Elections are over and assumption
of office by the new government, the Regular
Budget is presented to the Parliament on a
date as decided by the new governme~t.
6. Passing of Finance Bill The 'Finance Bill'
means the bill ordinarily introduced in each
year to give effect to the financial proposals of the Government of India for the next
financial Year, and includes a bill to give
effect to supplementary financial proposals
for any period. It is subjected to all the conditions applicable to a Money Bill. Unlike the
Appropriation Bill, the amendments (seeking
to reject or reduce a tax) can be moved in the
case of finance bill.
During this stage, a member can discuss
matters relating to general administration,
lo cal grievances within the sphere of the
responsibility of the Government of India or
monetary or financial policy of th~ government.
According to the Provisional Collection of
Tones Act of 1931, the Finance Bill must be
enacted (i.e., passed by the Parliament and
assented to by the President) within 75 days.
The Finance Act legalises the income side
of the budget and completes the process of
the enactment of the budget.

Other Grants
In addition to the budget that contains the
ordinary estimates of income and expenditure for one financial year, various other

~ 255

grants are made by the Parliament under
extraordinary or special circumstances:
Supplementary Grant It is granted when the
amount authorised by the Parliament through
the appropriation act for a particular service
for the current financial year is found to be
insufficient for that year.
Additional Grant It is granted when a need
has arisen during the current financial year for
additional expendit~re upon some new set\'ice
not contemplated in the budget for that year.
Excess Grant It is granted when money has
been spent on any service during a financial
year in excess of the amount granted for that
service in the budget for that year. It is voted
by the Lok Sabha after the financial year.
Before the demands for excess grants are
submitted to the Lok Sabha for voting, they
must be approved by the Public Accounts
Committee of Parliament.
Vote of Credit It is granted for meeting an
unexpected demand upon t he resources of
India, wh en on account of the magnitude or
the indefinite character of the service, the
demand cannot be stated with the details
ordinarily given in a budget. Hence, it is like
a blank cheque given to the Executive by th~
Lok Sabha.
.
Exceptional Grant It is granted for a special
purpose and forms no part of the current
service of any financial year.
Token Grant It is granted when funds to
meet the proposed expenditure on a new
sen,ice ca n be made available by reappropriation. A demand for the grant of a token
sum is submitted to the vote of the Lok Sabha
and if assented, funds are' made available.
Reappropriation involves transfer of funds
from one head to another. It does not involve
any additiona l expenditure.
Supplementary, additional, excess and
exceptional -grants and vote of credit are
regulated by the same procedure which is
applicable in the case of a regular budget.

256 ,rf! Indian Polity
Funds
The Constitution of India provides for the
following three kinds of fu nds for the Cen tral
government:
I. Consolidated Fund of India (Article 266)
2. Public Account of India (Article 266)
3 . Contingency Fund of lndia (Art icle 267)
Consolidated fund of India It is a fund to
which all receipts are credited and all payments are debited. In other words, (a) all
revenues recei ved by the Gove rnment of
India; (b) aJ110ans raised by the Government
by the issue of treasury bill s, loans or ways
a nd means of advances; and (c) all money
received by the government in repayment of
loan s forms the Consolidated Fund of India.
All the legally authorised pay m e nts on behalf
of the Government of Ind ia are made out of
this fund. No money out of this fu nd can
be appropriated (issued or drawn ) except in
accordance with a parliamtmtary law.
Public Account of India All other public
money (other than those which are credited
to the Consolidated Fund of India) received
by or on behalf of the Government of Indi a
shall be cred ited to the Public Account of
India. This includes provident fund deposits, judicial deposits, savings bank deposits,
departmental deposits, remittances and so on.
This account is operated by executive action,
that is, the payme nts from this account ca n
by made without parliamentary appropriation. Such payments are mostly in the nature
of banking transactions.
Contingency Fund of India The Constitu tion
authorised the Parliament to establish a
'Contingency Fund of Indi a', into which
amounts determined by law are paid from
time to time. Accordingly, the Parliament
enacted the contingency fund of India Act in
1950. This fund is IJ.laced at the disposal of the
President, and he/ she can make adva nces out
of it to meet unforeseen expenditure pending
its authorisation by the Parliament. The fund
is held by the finance secretary on behalf

of the President. Like the publi c account of
India, it is also operated by executive action.

MULTIFUNCTIONAL ROLE
OF PARLIAMENT
In the 'Indian politico-administrative syste m',
the Parliament occupies a central position
and has a multifun ctional role. It enjoys
exte nsive powers and perfo rm s a variety of
functions towards the fulfilment of its con stitut ionall y expected role. Its powers and
functions can be classified uneler the follow~
ing heads:
1. Legislative Powers and Functions
2. Executive Powers and Functions
3. Financial Powers and Functions
4. Const ituent Powers and Functions
5. Judicial Powers a nd functions
6 . Electora l Powers a nd Fun ctions
7. Other powers and functions.

II ILegislative Powers and Functions
The primary function of Par1iament is to
make laws for the governance of the country.
It has exclu sive power to m ake laws on the
subj ects enumerated in the Un ion List (wh ich
at present has 98 subjects, originally 97 subjects) and on the residuary subjects (that is,
subjects not enumerated in any of th e three
li sts). With regard to Co ncurre nt List (wh ich
has at present 52 subj ects, originally 47 subjects), the Parliament ha s overriding powers,
that is, the law of Parliament prevails over
the law of the state leg islature in case of a
co nflict between the two.
The Co nst itution also empowers the Parliament to make Jaws on the subjects enumerated in the State List (which at present has
59 subj ects, originally 66 subjects) under the
following five abnormal c ircum stances:
(a) when Rajya Sa bha passes a resolution to
t hat effect.
(b) when a pro clamat ion of Na tional
Emergen cy is in operation.
(c) when two or more states make a joint
request to the Parliament.

Parliament

(d) when necessary to give effect to international agreements, treaties and
conventions.
(e) when President's Rule is in operation in
the state.
Al1 the ordin~nces issued by the President
(during the recess of the Parliament) must be
approved by the Parliament within six weeks
after its reassembly. An ordinance becomes
inoperative if it is not approved by the parliament within that period.
The Parliament makes la ws in a skeleton
form and authorises the Execut ive to m..,.ke
detailed rules and regulations within th e
framework of the parent law. This is known
as delegated legislah"on or executive legislation
or subordinate leg islation. Such rules and
regulations are placed before the Parliament
for its exam ination .

fil lE~ecutive Powers and Functions
The Constitution of India establ ished a parliame nta ry form of government in which the
Executive is responsible to the Parliament for
its policies and acts. Hence, the Parliament
exercises control over the Executive through
question-hour, zero hour, half-an -h our discussion, short duration discussion, call ing
attention motion, adjournment motion, noconfidence motion, censure motion a nd oth er
discussions. It also supervises the activities of
the Executive with the help of its committees
like committee 'on governme nt assurances,
committee on subordinate legislation, committee on petitions, etc.
Th e ministers are collectively responsible
to the Parliament in gene ral and to the Lok
Sabha in particular.. As a part of collective
responsibility, there is individual responsibility, that is, each minister is individually
responsible for the efficient administration
of th e ministry under his/her charge. This
means that they continue in office so long
as they enjoy the confidence of the majority
members in the Lok Sabha. In other words,
the council of ministers can be removed
from office by the Lok Sabha by passing a

~ 257

no-confidence motion. The Lok Sabha can
a lso express lack of confidence in the government in the following ways:
(a) By not passing a motion of thanks on the
President's inaugural address.
(b) By rejecting a money hill.
( c) By passing a censure motion or an
adjournment motion.
(d) By defeating the government on a vital
issue.
(e ) By passing a cut motion.
Therefore, "the first function of Parliament
can be said to be to select the group which is
to form the government, support and sustain
it in power so long as it enjoys its confidence,
a nd to expel it when it ceases to do so, and
leave it to th e people to decide at the next
general e lection.,,23

II IFinancial Powers and Functions
No tax can be levied or collected and no expen·
diture can be incurred by the Executive except
under the authority and with the approval of
ParHament. Hence, the budget is placed before
the Parliament for its approval. The enactment
of the budget by the Parliament lega lises the
receipts and expenditure of the government
for the ensuing financial year.
T he Parliament a lso scrutinises government spending and financial performance
wi th the help of its financial committees.
These in clude public accounts committee,
estimates committee and committee on pub·
lie undertakings. They bring out the cases
of megal, irregular, unauthorised, improper
usage and wastage and extravagance in public
expenditure.
Th erefore, the parliamentary control over
the Executive in financial matters operates
in two stages:
(a) budgetary control, that is, control before
the app ropri ation of grants through the
enactment of th e· budget; and
(b) post·budgetary control , that is, co ntrol afte r the appropriation of gra n ts
through the three financial committees.
23 N.N. Mallya: Indian Parliament, p. 39.

258

,r(! Indian Polity

The budget is ba sed on the pr in cip le
of annu ity, tha t is, the Parliament g rants
money to the government for on e fi n anc ial
year. If the gra n ted mo ney is not spent by
the end of the fi na n cial year, then the bala n ce exp ires and return s to the Co nso lidated
Fun d of Indi a. T hi s practice is kn own as t he
'ru le of lapse'. It fa c il itates effective financia l contro l by the Parliament as no reserve
funds can be built wi thout its auth orisatio n .
However, the observance of t h is rul e lea ds to
heavy ru sh of expe ndi ture towards the close
of the financial year. This is popularl y ca ll ed
as 'Marc h Rush'.

II IConst ituent Powers and Functions
The Parliament is vested with t he powers
to a m e nd t h e Co n stitution by way of additio n , va ri atio n or repea l of a ny provisio n .
The major pa rt of t h e Co n stitution can be
amended by the Parliament wit h speci a l
majority, that is, a majority of t h e total
memb e rsh ip of each House a nd a majorit y
of not less t han two-t h irds of t he members
prese nt and vot ing i n each House. So me
other provisions of t h e Const itut ion can
be amended by t h e Parliam e nt with si mple
majority, that is, .a majority of the members
prese n t an d voting in eac h House of Parliament. Onl y a few prov isio ns of th e Co n stitution ca n be amended by th e Parl iament
(by special majority) a n d with the co n se nt
of at least half of the State Legis lat u res (by
s impl e majority) . However, the power to
initiate the process of the amend me nt of
the Con st itution ( in a ll the three cases) lies
exclusive ly in th e hands of the Parliament
and not th e state legi sla ture. There is on ly
one exception, t hat is, t he sta te leg islat ure
ca n pass a reso lu tio n request ing the Parliament for the creat io n or abo liti o n of t he
legislative council in the state. Based on the
reso lution, t he Pa rl iament makes an act for
amen di ng t he Co nsti tution to t hat effect.
1b sum up, the Parli ament ca n a mend the
Const itu tion in t hree ways:
(.1) By si mple majority;
(b) By specia l majority; and

(c) By special majority but with the co nsent
of ha lf of all the state legislatures.
T he constitue nt power of the Parli ament is
not un li mited; it is subject to the 'basic structure' of the Con stitution. In others words,
the Parliament can a mend any provision of
the Co nstitution except th e 'basic features'
of the Co nstitutio n . Thi s was ru led by the
Supreme Court in the Kestlvtlllal1da Bharati
" I
case-' ( 1973).

El lJudicial Powers and Functions
The judicial powers a nd functions of t he Parli ament in c lude the following:
(a) [t can impeach the President for the violation of the Const ituti on.
(b) It can remove the Vice-Pres ide n t from
hi s/ he r office.
(c) It can recommend the removal of j udges
( in cludi ng chi ef justice) of t he Supreme
Co urt a nd t he hi gh co urts, chi ef e lection co mmissio ner, state elect ion co mmi ss ioner and comptroller an d aud itor
genera l to the Preside nt.
(d) I.t ca n punish its me mbers or outs iders
for the brea ch of its privileges or its
contemp t.

[I IElectoral Powers and Functions
The Parliament partic ipates in the e lection
of the President (a long with the state leg islative assembli es) a nd e lects the Vice-President.
The Lok Sabha elects its Speaker and Dep uty
Speake r, wh il e the Raj ya Sa bha e lects its
Deputy Chairma n .
The Parliame nt is also auth orised to make
laws to regu late the e lect ions to the offi ces
of Pres ident and Vice-P resid en t, to both the
Houses of Parlia ment a nd to both the Hou ses
of sta te leg islature. Accordi ngly, Parliament
enacted the Presidentia l and Vice-Presidentia l
Elections Act (1952), the Represe ntation of
the People Act (1950), the Represe ntation of
t he People Act ( 1951), etc.
24Kesavalllluda B/larali vs. Stale of Kera/a (1973).

parliament~, 259

II I·Other Powers and Functions
,
The various othe.r powers and functions of the
Parliament include:
(a) It serves as the highest deliberative body
in the country. It discusses various
issues of national and international
significance.
' (b) It approves all the three types of emergencies (national, state and financial)
procla!med by the President.
(c) It can create or abolish the state legislative
councils on the recommendation of the
concerned state legislative assemblies.
(d) It ca~ increase or decrease the area, alter
the boundaries and change the names of
states of the Indian Union.
(e) It can regulate the organisation and jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and high
courts and ~an establish a common high
court for two or more states.

INEFFECTIVENESS OF
PARLIAMENTARY CONTROL
The parliamentary control over government
and administration in India is more theoretical than practical. In reality, the control is
not as effective as it ought to be. The
, fol1owing factors are responsible for this:
.
(a) .The Parliament has neither time nor
.. expertise to control the administration
which has grown in volume as well as
complexity.
(b) Parliament's financial control is hindered
by the technica l nature of the demands
for grants. The parliamentarians bei_ng
laymen cannot understand them properly and fu lly.
(c) The legislative leadership li es with the
Executive and it plays a significant role
in formulating poli cies.
(d) The very size of the Parliament is too
large and unmanagable to be effective.
(e) The majority support enjoyed by the
Executive in the Parliament reduces the
possibility of effective criticism.
(f) The financial committees like Public
Accounts Committee examines the
.public expenditure after it has been

incurrl;!d by the Executive. Thus, they do
post mortem work.
(g) The increased recourse to 'guillotine'
reduced the scope of financial control.
(h) The growth of 'delegated legislation' has
reduced the role of Parliament in making detailed laws and has increased the
powers of bureaucracy.
(i) The frequent promulgation of ordinances
by the President dilutes the Parliament's
power of legislation.
(j) The Parliament's control is sporadic,
genera l and mostly political in nature.
(1<.) Lack of strong and steady opposition in
the Parliament, and a setback in the parliamentary behaviour and ethics, have
also contributed to the ineffectiveness of
legislative control over adJ11inistration
in India.

t POSITION OF RAJYA SABHA
The Constitutional position of the Rajya
Sabha (as compared with the Lok Sabha) can
be studied from three angles:
'1 . Where Rajya Sabha is equal to Lok Sabha.
2. Where Rajya Sabha is unequal to Lok
Sabha.
3. Where Rajya Sabha has special powers that
are not at all shared with the Lok Sabha .

Equal Status with Lok Sabha
In the following matters, the powers and
status of the Rajya Sabha are equal to that of
the Lok Sabha:·
1. Introduction and passage of ordinary
bills.
2. Introduction and passage of Constitutional
amendment bills.
3. Introduction and passage of financial
bills involving expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
4. Election and impeachment of the
President.
5 . Election and , removal of the · VicePresident. However, Rajya Sabha alone
can initiate the removal of the vice-Pres·
ident. Hel she is removed-by a resolution

260

fJ

Indian Polity

passed by the 1~1j ya Sa bha by a n effec~
tive majo r ity a nd agreed to by the Lok
Sa bha by a sim ple maj o rity.
6. Making recommendation to the Presiden t
for th e remova l of Ch ie f J ust ice and
j udge s o f Sup re m e Court and hi g h
courts, chi ef e lectio n co mm iss io ner a nd
co mptro ll er a nd a ud itor ge nera l.
7. Approval of o rd inan ces issued by the
Pres ide nt.
8. Approva l of procla mat ion of all three
ty pes of e merge nc ies by the Pres id ent.
9 . Selec tion of mi ni ste rs in cludin g th e
Prime Min ister. Unde r the Co nstitution ,
th e m i n iste rs i n c ludi n g t h e Prim e
Min ister can be me mbe rs of ei t he r
House. Howeve r, irrespective of the ir
me mbership, th ey are respo ns ible on ly
to th e Lo k Sabha .
10. Co nsideration of the reports of the c O l1 s t i ~
tutional bodies like Finance Com mi ss io n,
Un ion Public Service Comm ission, comptro ll er and a ud itor gen eral , etc.
n. En large me n t of the jurisd iction of the
Sup rem e Court a nd the Un ion Public
Se rvice Com mi ss ion .

Unequal Status with Lok Sabha
In the fo ll owin g ma tters, the powe rs and statu s of the Rilj ya Sa bha are uneq ua l to that of
the Lok Sa bha :
1. A Mo ney Bill ca n be introduced on ly in
the Lok Sabha and not in the Raj ya Sabha.
2. R.'1j Y<l S<lb ha c,ln llot a m end or reject a
Mo ney Bill. It shou ld return the b ill to
the Lok Sa bha withi n 14 days, eithe r
with rec o m m e n dat io n s or with ou t
reco m mend atiolls.
3. The Lok Sabha ca n either ;:Iccept or reject
a ll o r any o f th e re co m me ndation s
o f the Raj ya Sabha. In both the cases,
the mo ney bi ll is dee med to have bee n
passed by the two Houses.
4. A finan cia l b ill, no t conta in ing so le ly
the matte rs of Articl e 11 0, also can be
introd uced o nl y in the Lo k Sa bh a a nd
not in the R.:'1j ya Sa bha. But, with regard
to its passage, bo th th e I-louses have
equa l powers.

5. The fin al powe r to deci de whether a
pa rti cular bill is a Mo ney Bill o r not is
vested in th e Speaker of the Lok S<lb ha.
6. The Spea ker of Lok Sab l1<l presid es over
the joi n t sitting of bot h the Hou ses.
7. The Lok Sab ha with greater num ber win s
th e battl e in a jO in t Sitt ing excep l when
the combined stre ngth of th e ru lin g
party in both the Houses is less than
tha t of th e opposit ion pa rties_
8. Raj ya Sab ha can onl y d isc llss the bu dget
bu t C<l nn ot vote o n the de mands for
grants (whi ch is th e exclusive p rivil ege
of the 10k Sabha ).
9 . A resolution for the discontinua nce of the
n<:ltio na l e merge ncy C<l n be p<l ssed onl y
by th e 10k Sabha a n d not by t he Raj ya
S<lb ha.
10. Th e Raj ya Sa bha ca n n ot remove th e
cou nc il of mi n isters by pass ing a noco nfide n ce Ill o ti o n. T h is is becau se
the Cou ncil of ministers is collecti ve ly
res p o n s ib le o nl y to th e Lok Sabha .
But, the Rajya Sab ha can di scuss and
crit icise the po li cies a nd act ivities of the
gove rn me nt.

Special Powers of Ra;ya Sabha
The Rajya Sabha has bee n given fb ur exclusive
or specia l powers that a re not enj oyed by th e
Lok Sabha:
) . It ca n author ise the Pa rli ament to make a
law 0 11 a subj ect enum erated in the State
List (Article 249)2. It ca n a uthor ise the Pa rl ia men t to crea te
new All-Indi a Se rvi ces co m mo n to both
the Ce n tre a n d sta tes ( Arti cle 312).
3 . It al o n e can in itiat e a move for the
re mova l of th e Vi ce-Pres ide nt. In oth er
word s, a reso lu t io n for the re mova l of
t he V i ce~ P r es i d e n t ca n be int rodu ced
o n ly in th e Raj ya Sab ha a n d no t in th e
Lok Sa bha (A rti c le 67 ).
4. If a pro cla m at io n is iss ued by th e
Pres iden t for im posi ng l1<1 tio nal e me rge ncy o r Pres id ent 's ru le or fin a nciaJ
eme rgency at a time when the Lok Sa bha
ha s been di sso lved o r the d issolu ti o n o f

Parliament

the Lok Sab ha ta kes pl ace within th e
period allowed fo r its ap prova l, t he n
th e proclamat ion can remain effecti ve
even if it is approved by the Raj ya Sabha
alone ( Articles 352, 356 a nd 360).
An a nalys is of t he above points makes it
clear that th e positi on of th e Raj ya Sa bha in

who are e nti tled to sp eak a nd take part in th e
proceedings of a House of Pa rliam e nt or an y
of its co mmi ttees. These include the attorney
ge neral of Indi a a nd Uni on m ini ste rs.
It must be clarified here tha t the parliamentary privileges do not extend to the President
who is also a n integra l part of the Parliam e nt.

tha t of the Hou se of Lords in the British co n-

Classification

our co nstitutional syste m is not as weak as

stitutional system nor as strong as that of th e
Se nate in the Ame r ica n constituti ona l system . Except in fin anc ia l ma tte rs an d co ntrol
over the coun ci l of mini sters, the powe rs a nd

~

~ 261

statu s of the Rajya Sabha in a ll other sph eres
arc b roadly equal a nd coord ina te with that of
the Lok Sabha.
Even though the Rajya Sabha has been given
less powers as compared with the Lok Sabha, its
utility is supported on the followin g grounds:
I . It ch ecks hasty, defective, ca reless and illconside red leg islation made by the Lok
Sa bha by making provis ion of revision
and thought.
2 . It fa c ilitates giv in g represe n tat ion to
e min e nt profess ionals and experts who
can n ot fa ce t he direct e lect ion . The
President nominates 12 such persons to
the Rajya Sabha .
3. It maintai n s t he fe deral e quilibrium
by protect ing the interests of the sL1.tes
aga inst th e undue interfe re n ce of the
Centre.

~ PARLIAMENTARY PRIVILEGES
Meaning
Parliamentary p rivileges are special ri ghts,
immunities a nd exemptions e nj oyed by the
tWO Houses of Parliament, their co mm ittees
a nd their members. They are necessa ry in
order to secure the indepe nde nce an d effective ness of their act ion s. Without these pri vileges, the Hou ses can ne ithe r mai ntain their
a uthority, dignity and honour nor ca n protect
the ir members from any obstruction in the di sc harge of their pa rliame ntary responsibilities.
Th e Con stitution has also exte nd ed the
parliamenta ry privileges to those pe rsons

Parliamentary pr ivil eges ca n be classified
into two broad categories:
1. those that are e nj oyed by each House of
Parliam e nt co ll ecti ve ly, and
2. those that a re e njoyed by the membe rs
indi vidu a lly.
Collective Privileges The pri vi leges belongi ng to each House of Parliament co llect ive ly
ilrc:

] . It has t he r ight to pub lish its reports,
debates and proceedin gs a nd a lso the
right to prohibit others fro m publishing
th e sa m e. The 44th Am endment Act of
] 978 re sto red th e free do m of the press
to publish true reports of pa rliamentary
proceedi ngs without pri or permission
of the Ho use. But thi s is not applicable
in the case of a sec ret s itting of th e
House.
2. It ca n excl ude strangers from its proceedings and hold sec ret s ittin gs to discuss
some importan t matters.
3 . It ca n make ru les to regu la te its own procedure and the co ndu ct of its busi ness
and to adjud icate upon such matte rs.
4 . It ca n punish me mbers as we ll as outs ide rs for breach of its pri vil eges or its
co n te mpt by reprim a nd, a dm onit io n
or imp r iso nm ent (a lso suspension or
expulsion, in case of members).25

25 l n 1977, the sixth Lok Sabha ex pelled Mrs. Indira

Ga ndhi from its membersh ip and se ntenced her
to ja il for a week for committing a contempt of
House while she was Prime Mi nister. But, the seventh Lok Sabha rescinded the resolution expelling
her by describing it as poli tica lly motivated. In
1990, a form er Minister, K.K. Tiwari, was reprima nded by the Rajya Sabha.

262 (J Indian Polity
5. It has the right to receive immediate
information of the arrest, detention,
conviction, imprisonment and release
of a member.
6. It can institute inquiries and order the
attendance of witnesses and send for
relevant papers and records.
7. The courts are prohibited to inquire
into the proceedings of a House or its
committees.
8. No person (either a member or outsider)
can be arrested, and no legal process
(civil or criminal) can be served within
the precincts of the House without the
permission of the presiding officer.

Individual Privileges The privileges belong.
ing to the members individually are:
1. They cannot be arrested during the session of Parliament and 40 days before
the beginning and 40 days after the
end of a session. This privilege is
available only in civil cases and not in
criminal cases or preventive detention
cases.
2. They have freedom of speech in
Parliament. No member is liable to any
proceedings in any court for anything
said or any vote given by him/her in
Parliament or its committees. This freedom is subject to the provisions of the
Constitution and to the rules and stand·
ing orders regulating the procedure of
Parliament. 26
3. They are exempted from jury service.
They can refuse to give evidence and
appear as a witness in a case pending in
a court when Parliament is in session.
26 Article 121 of the Constitution says that no discussion shall take place in Parliament with respect to
the conduct of any judge of the Supreme Court or
of a high court in the discharge of his/her duties
except upon a motion for presenting an address to
the President praying for the removal of the judge.
Under Rules 349 to 350 of the Lok Sabha, use of
unparliamentary language or unparliamentary
conduct of a member is prohibited.

Breach of Privilege and Contempt

of the House

"When any individual or authority disregards or attacks any of the privileges,
rights and immunities, either of the
member individually or of the House
in its collective capacity, the offence
is termed as breach of privilege 'and is
punishable by the House.~27
Any act or omission which obstructs a House
of Parliament, its member or its officer in the
perfonnance of their functions or which has
a tendency, directly or indirectly to produce
results against the dignity, authority and
honour of the House is treated as a contempt
of the House. 28
Though the two phrases, 'breach of privilege'. and 'contempt of the Ho.use' are used
interchangeably, they have different impHcations. 'Normally, a breach of privilege may
amount to contempt of the House. Likewise,
contempt of the House may include a brei ~ h
of privilege also. Contempt of the House, h ',vever, has wider implications. There may 1- ,a
contempt of the House without specific' ..,
committing a breach of privilege,.29 S
lady, 'actions which are not breaches of. J -.
specific privilege but are offences againt'~id.
dignity and authority of the House amount to
contempt of the House,.30 For example, disobedience to a legitimate order of the House is
not a breach of privilege, but can be punished
as contempt of the House.

Sources of Privileges
Originally, the Constitution (Article 105)
expressedly mentioned two privileges, that
is, freedom of speech in Parliament and right
27M.N. Kaul and S.L. Shakdher, Practice and Procedure
of Parliament, First Edition, p. 157.
.
2'7homas Erskine May: Parliamentary Practice,
15th Edition, p. 109.
29Subhash C. Ka..<:.hyap: Our Parliament, National Book
'Ihtst, 1999 Edition, p. 24l.
3tThomas Erskine May: Parliamentary Practice,
16th Edition, p. 43.

-

Parliament

of publication of its proceedings. With regard
to other privileges, it provided that , they
were to be the same as those of the British
House of Commons, its committees and its
members on the date of its commencement
(ie, 26 January, 1950), until defined by Parliament. The 44th Amendment Act of ] 978
provided that the other privileges of each
House of Parliament, its committees and its
members are to be those which they had on
the date of its commencement (ie, 20 June,
]979), until defined by Parliament. This
means that the position with regard to other
privileges remains same. In other words, the
amendment has made only verbal changes
by dropping a direct reference to th e British
House of Commons, without making any
change in the implication of the provision. 31
It should be noted here that the Parliament, till now, has not made any special law
to exhaustively codify all the privileges. They
are based on five sources, namely,
1. Constitutional provisions,
2. Various laws made by Parliament,
3. Rules of both the Houses,
4. Parliamentary conventions, and
5. Judicial interpretations.

t SOVEREIGNTY OF PARLIAMENT

The doctrine of 'sovereignty of Parliament'
is associated with the British Parliament.
Sovereignty means the supreme power
within the State. That supreme power in
Great Britain lies with the Parliament. There
are no 'legal' restrictions on its authority
and juris~iction.
31 The then law minister gave the following

reason
for dropping reference to the British House of
Commons; ~That the original provision-there
was no escape from it-had referred to the British
House of Commons. Now a proud country like India would like to avoid making any reference to
a foreign institution in its own solemn constitutional document. Therefore, this verbal change is
being introduced so that there may not be any reference to a foreign institution.~

31 263

Therefore, the sovereignty of Parliament
(parliamentary supremacy) is a cardinal
feature of the British constitutional system.
According to AV Dicey, the British jurist, this
principle has three ·implications: 32
1. The Parliament can make, amend, substitute or repeal any law. De Lolme,
a British political analyst, said, :The
British Parliament can do every thing
except make a woman a man and a man
a woman'.
2. The Parliament can make constitutional
laws by the same procedure as ordinary
laws. In other words, there is no legal
distinction between the constituent
authority and the legislative authority
of the British Parliament.
3. The Parliamentary laws cannot be
declared invalid by the Judiciary as being
unconstitutiona1. In other words, there is
no system of judicial review in Britain.
The Indian Parliament, on the other hand,
cannot be regarded as a sovereign body in
the similar sense as there are 'legal' restrictions on its authority and jurisdiction. The
factors that limi.t the sovereignty of Indian
Parliament are;

II IWritten Nature of the Constitution
The Constitution is the fundamental law of the
land in our country. It has defined the authority and jurisdiction of all the three organs
of the Union government and the nature of
interrelationship between them. Hence, the
Parliament has to operate within the limits
prescribed by the Constitution. There is also
a legal distinction between the legislative
authority and the constituent authority of the
Parliament. Moreover, to effect certain amendments to the Constitution, the ratification of
half of the states is also required. In Britain,
on the other hand, the Constitution is neither
written nor there is anything like a fundamental law of the land.
32 A.V. Dicey; Introduction to the Study of the Law of the

Constitution, Macmillan, 1965 Edition, pp. 39-40.

264

,f!

Ind;an Pol;';

!I IFederal System of Government
India has a federal syste m of government with
a constitutional divi s ion of powers between
the Union and the states. Both have to operate
within the spheres allotted to them. Hence,
the law-making authority of the Parliament
gets confined to the subjects enumerated in
the Unio n List and Concu rrent List and does
not extend to the subj ects enumerated in the
Sta te List (except in five ab normal circumsta nces and that too for a short period). Britain, on the other hand, has a unitary syste m
of government and hence, all the powers are
vested in the Centre.

Ell ISystem of Judicial Review
The adoption of an independent ,Judiciary
with the power of judicial review also restricts
the suprema cy of our Parliament. Both the
Supreme Court and high courts can declare
the laws enacted by the Parliament as vo id
and ultra vires (unconstitutional), if they contravene any provi sion of the Constitution. On
the other hand, there is no system of judicial
review in Britain. The British Courts have
to apply the Parliamentary laws to specific
cases, without examining their co nstitutionality, lega lity or reasonableness.

mIFundamental Rights
The authority of the Parliament is a lso
restricted by the incorporation of a code of

justiciable fundamental rights under Part III
of the Const itution. Article 13 prohibits the
State from making a law that either takes
away tOtally or abrogates in part a fundamental right. Hence, a Parliamentary law that
co ntravenes the fundamental rights sha ll be
void. In Britain, on the other hand , there is
110 cod ifi cat ion of justiciable fundamental
rights in the Co nstitution . The British Parliament has also not made any law that lays
down the fundamental ri ghts of the c itizen s.
However, it does not mean that the British
cit ize ns do not have rights. Though there is
no charter guaranteeing rights, there is maximum liberty in Britain due to the existence
of the Rule of Law.
Therefore, even though the nomenclature
and orga ni satio na l pattern of our Parliament
is similar to that of the British Parliam ent,
there is a substantial difference between the
two. The Indian Parliament is not a sovereign
body in th e se nse in which the British Parliament is a sovereign body. Unlike the British
Parliament, the authority and jurisdiction of
the Indian Parliament are defined, limited
and restrained.
In this regard, the Ind.ia n Parliament is
similar to the American Legislature (k nown
as Congress). In USA also, th e sovereignty of
Co ngress is legall y restricted by the written
character of the Co n st itution, the federal
system of government, the syste m of judicial
review and the Bill of Rights.

Table 23.5

Allocation of Seats in Parliament for States and Union Territories and seats reserved for SCs
and STs in the Lok Sabha

S.No.

States/UTs

No. of Seats In
RaJya Sabha

No. of Seats to
lok Sabha

11

25
2

4

1

2

Reserved for the
Scheduled Castes

Reserved fot the
Scheduled Tribes

I. States

1.

Andhra Pradesh

2.

Arunachal Pradesh

3.

Assam

7

l'

1

4.

Bihar

16

40

5.

6

Chhattlsgarh

5

11

4

Parliament
S No

States/UTs

i 6.

Goa

r

No. of Seats in
RajYa Sabha

No of Seats In
Lok Sabha

........-~ n,.

tC

2

7 . ..

GU~;at : :

8.

Haryana

5

10

9.

Himachal Pradesh

3

4

10.

6
Jharkhand _~.~_~~_=~;.-_
, ~

14

Karnataka

12

28

Kerala

9

Madhya P rad~sh

"
11

11

,

11.
12.
13.

_:aw ...

15.

url'J

4

2

------

------_ ..

----- ----_ ..
5

20

2

29

4

48

5

:n

6
4

2

•

~

17.

Mizor"a"m
::.._ _ _~_& _~

18.

Nagaland

10

2

-

2

•

7

-----,.-.

10

. • liE"'"

Sikkim

,

~

,

N

18

Tamil Nadu

, 7......

27.

---

Uttar Pradesh

2

~----

Meghalaya

"

5

. " '... 2

Manipu!!.'_ _ _ _ _~

16.

Reserved for the
Scheduled Trtbes

2

26

19

Maharashtra .

14.

Reserved for the
Scheduled Castes

'!1 265

r.;:
28
:;:._ _ _ w
;:,;;
es::1C;8;:e;:.
'9
" a:c'_ _ __ _ _ _-

•

39

7

17

3

3

2

2
5

3

'---~-~~

31

80

17

.:.:;
1~ ___.,.~.=o_;.
42;;.._~"_~_ __....;1 ~
0 ~ _____ ._

2

_ _...::
11. Union Territories

C

1.

Andaman and Nicobar
Islands

" -"="

Ch; , dI
Dadra and Nagar Haveli
and Daman and Diu

2.
3.

9";":==

-;

2

~ -----

4.

Oelhi (The National
Capital Territory of

3

7

D~I ~I)

5.

Lakshadweep

6.

Pud~her'Y _

t7.

.8

Jammu and Kashmir
= .. .
",
Ladakh

4
_

0

III. Nominated members

5

""A'

. . . 21G&UL"

-=-----_

12

l--_ _ _~~
Total _ _~~~~_~:=.245

_ _ _ .:5~4'"3~ _ __

>

•

84

47

266 ,

Indian Polity

Table 23.6

Durations of the Lok Sabha (from First Lok Sabha to Present l ok Sabha)

Lok Sabha

Duration

Remarks

First

1952-1957

Dissolved 38 days before expiry of its term .

Second

1957-1962

Dissolved 40 days before expiry of its term.

Third

1962- 1967

Dissolved 44 days before expiry of its term.

Founh

1967- 1970

Dissolved one year and 79 days before expiry of its term.

Fifth

1971-1977

Sixth

1977-1979

Dissolved after having been in existence for a period of two years, four months
and 28 days.

Seventh

1980-1984

Dissolved 20 days before expiry of its term.

Eighth

1985-1989

Dissolved 48 days before expiry of its term.

Ninth

1989-1991

Oissolved after having been in existence for a period of one year, two momhs
and 25 days.

Tenth

1991-1996

Eleventh

1996-1997

Dissolved after having been in existence for a period of one year, six months and
13 days.

Twelfth

1998-1999

Dissolved after having been In existence for a period of one year, one month and
four days.

Thineenth

1999-2004

Dissolved 253 days before expiry of its term.

Founeenth

2004-2009

Fifteenth

2009-20 14

Sixteenth

2014-20 19

Seventeenth

2019-Continulng

Table 23.7

Speakers of the Lok Sabha (from First Lok Sabha to Present Lok Sabha)

Term of the Lok Sabha was extended two times by one year at a time. Howeve'.
the House was dissolved after having been in existence for a period of five
years, 10 months and six days.

Lok Sabha

Name

Tenure (Remarks)

First

1. Ganesh Vasudev Mavalanker

1952 to 1956 (Died)

2. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar

1956 to 1957

Second

Ananthasayanam Ayyangar

1957 to 1962

Third

Hukum Singh

1962 to 1967

Fourth

1. Neelam Sanjiva Reddy

1967 to 1969 (Resigned)

2. Gurdial Singh DhHlan

1969 to 197 1

1. Gurdial Singh OhlUan

1971 to 1975 (Resigned)

2. Bali Ram Bhagat

1976 to 1977

Fifth

______________________________________________________________

v

-'~~or~uo~m~e~n~I_~
~" 267

Lok Sabha

Na me

Tenure (Remarks)

Sixth

1. Neelam Sanjiva Reddy

1977 to 1977 (Resigned)

2. K.S. Hegde

1977 to 1980

Seventh

1980 101985

I

Salram Jakhar

Eighth

Salram Jakhar

1985 to 1989

Ninth

Rabi Ray

1989 to 1991

Tenth

Shlvraj PaUl

1991 to 1996

Eleventh

P.A. Sangma

1996 to 1998

Twelfth

G.M.C. Balayogi

1998 to 1999

Thirteenth

1. G.M.C. 8alayogl

1999 to 2002 (Died)

2. Manohar Joshi

2002 to 2004

Fourteenth

Somnath Chatterjee

2004 to 2009

[ Fifteenth

Ms. Melra Kumar

2009 - 2014

Sixteenth

Ms. 5umitra Mahajan

2014 - 2019

Seventeenth

Om Bida

2019 - till date

Table 23.8

Articles Related to Parliament at a Glance

Article No

Subject Matter

I

.

General

l

79.

Constitution of Parliament

80.

Composition of the Council of States

81.

Composition of the House of the People

82.

Readjustment after each census

83.

Duration of Houses of Parliament

84.

Qualification for membership of Parliament

85.

Sessions of Parliament, prorogation and dissolution

86.

Right of President to address and send messages to Houses

L 87.

88.

Special address by the President
Rights of Ministers and Attorney-General as respects Houses
Officers of Parliament

89.

The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Council of States

90.

Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the office of Deputy Chairma~
n _ _• __
(Contd.)

268

j! Indian Polity

Article No

Subject Matter

9 1.

Power of the Deputy Chairman or other person to perform the duties of the office of, or to act as,
Chairman

92.

The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman not to preside while a resolution for his/her removal from office
is under consideration

93.

The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of the People

94.

Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of Speaker and Deputy Speaker

95.

Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the duties of the office of, or to act as,
Speaker

96.

The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolution for his/her removal from office Is
under consideration

97,

Salaries and allowances of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker

98.

Secretariat of Parliament
Conduct of Business

99.

Oath or affirmation by members

100.

Voting in Houses, power of Houses to act notwithstanding vacancies and quorum
Disqualifications of Members

101.

Vacation of seats

102.

Disqualifications for membership

103.

Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members

104.

Penalty for sitting and voUng before making oath or affirmation under Article gg or when not qualified
or when disqualified
Powers, Privileges and Immunities of Parliament and its Members

105.

Powers, privileges, etc., of the Houses of Parliament and of the members and committees thereof

106.

Salaries and allowances of members

Leglslattve Procedure

107.

Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills

108.

Joint sitting of both Houses In certain cases

109.

Special procedure in respect of Money Bills

11 0.

Definition of "Money B ills~

111 .

Assent to Bills

Procedures In Financial Matters

112.

Annual financial statement

113.

Procedure in Parliament with respect to estimates

Parliament

Article No

Subject Matter

114.

Appropriation Bills

11 S.

Supplementary, additional or excess grants

116.

Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional grants

117.

Special provlstons as to financial Bills
Procedure Gener.lly

I.

118.

Rules of procedure

119.

Regulation by law of procedure In Parliament In relation to financial business

120.

language to be used in Parliament

121 .

Restriction on discussion In Parliament

122.

Courts not to Inquire IMo proceedings of Parliament
legislative Power. of t he President

123.

Power of President to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Parliament

Scan the Q~ Code to access the conceptual video on Role of
Parliament and its Limitations and other important topics on EDGE

~ 269

CHAPTER

24

~ MEANING
The Parliament is too unwieldy a body to
deliberate effectively the issues that come up
before it. The functions of the Parliament are
varied, complex and voluminous. Moreover,
it neither has adequate time nor necessary
expertise to make a detailed scrutiny of all
legislative measures and other matters. There·
fore, it is assisted by a number of committees
in the discharge of its duties.
The Constitution of India makes a mention of these committees at different places,
but without making any specific provisions
regarding their composition, tenure, functions, etc. All these matters are dealt by the
rules of two Houses. Accordingly, a parliamentary committee means a committee that:
1. is appointed or elected by the House or
nominated by the Speaker/Chairman
2. works under the direction of the Speaker/
Cha irman
3. presents its report to the House or to the
Speaker/Chairman
4. has a secretariat provided by the Lok
Sabha/Rajya Sabha
The consultative committees, which also
consist of members of Parliament, are not
parliamentary committees as they do not
fulfil above four conditions.

~ CLASSIFICATION
Broadly, parliamentary committees are of
two kindS-Standing Committees and Ad
Hoc Committees. The former are permanent
(constituted every year or periodically) and
work on a continuous basis, while the latter

Pa rlia menta ry
Committees

are temporary and cease to exist on completion of the task assigned to them.

Standing Committees
On the basis of the nature of functions performed by them, standing committees can be
classified into the fonowing six categories:

1. Financial Committees

(a) Public Accounts Committee
(b) Estimates Committee
(c) Committee on Public Undertakings

2. Department-Related Standing
Committees (24)
3. Committees to Inquire

(a) Committee on Petitions
(b) Committee of Privileges
(e) Ethics Committee

4. Committees to Scrutinise and Control
(a)
(b)
(e)
(d)
(e)
(f)

Committee on Government Assurances
Committee on Subordinate Legislation
Committee on Papers Laid on the Thble
Committee on Welfare of SCs and STh
Committee on Empowerment of Women
Joint Committee' on Offices of Profit

5. Committees Relating to the Day-to-Day
Business of the House

(a) Business Advisory Committee
(b) Committee on Private Members' Bills and
Resolutions

I A joint committee consis(s of members of both the

Houses of Parliament.

Parliamentary Committees

(e) Rules·Committee
(d) Com mittee on Absence of Members from
the Sitti n gs of the House

6. House-Keeping Committees or Service
Committees (i.e., Committees concerned
with the Provision of Facilities and Services
to Members):
(a) Ge neral Purposes Com mittee
(b) Hou se Committee
(e) Library Committee
(d) Joint Co mmittee on Salari es and
Allowances of Members of Parliament

Ad Hoc Committees
Ad hoc co mmittees ca n be divided into two

categori es, th at is, Inquiry Committees and
Advisory Committees.
I . Inqui ry Committees are constituted from
time to tim e, either by the two Houses
on a motion adopted in that behalf, or
by the Speaker / Cha irman, to inquire
into and report on specific subj ects. For
exa mple:
(a) Railway Conventio n Co mmittee 2
(b) Committee on Members of Parliament
Local Area Development Sche m e
(MPLADS)
(c) J oi nt Co mmittee on Security in
Parliament Complex
(d) Committee on Provision of Computers
to Members of Parliament, Offices
of Political Parties and Officers of
the Lok Sabha Secretariat
( e) Committee on Food Management in
Parliament House Com plex
(f) Committee o n In sta llation of
Portraits / Statues of Nat ional
Leaders and Parliamentarians In
Parlia m ent House Complex

1'he Ra ilway Convention Comm ittee, 1949 was
the first Committee after independence. This
Comm ittee and subsequent Committees confined
themselves to determining the Rate of Dividend
payable by the Railways to General Revenues. Since
1971, the Railway Convention Committees have been
taking up subjects which have a bea ring on the
working of the Railways and Railway Finances.

~ 271

(g) Joint Committee on Maintenance of
Heritage Character and Development
'. of Pa rliam ent House Com plex
(b) Com mittee on Violation of Protocol
Norms and Contemptuous Behaviour
of Govemment Officers with Members
of Lok Sabha
(i) Co mmittee on Welfare of Other
Backward Classes
CD Com mi ttee to Inquire into the
Improper Co nduct of a Member
2. Advisory Com mittees include select or
joint co mmittees on bills, which are
appo inted to consider and report on
particular bills. These committees are
distinguishable from the other ad hoc
committees in as much as they are concerned with bills and the procedure to
be followed by them is laid down in the
Rules of Procedure and the Directions
by the Speaker/ Chairman .
When a Bill comes up before a House for
ge n era l discussion, it is open to that House
to refer it to a Select Co mm ittee of the House
or a Joi nt Committee of the two Houses. A
motion to thi s effect has to be moved and
adopted in the House in whi ch the Bill co mes
up for co nsideration . In case the motion
adopted is for reference of the Bill to a Joint
Committee, the decision is conveyed to the
other Hou se, requ est ing th e memb ers to
nominate members of th e other House to
serve on the Committee.
The Select o r Joint Co mmittee considers the Bill cla use by clause just as the two
Houses do. Amendments to various clauses
ca n be moved by members of the Com mittee. The Committee can also take evidence
of associations, public bodies or experts who
are interested in the Bill. After th e Bill has
thus been conSidered, the Committee su"bmits
its report to th e House. Members who do not
agree with the m ajo rity report m ay append
th eir minu tes of dissent to the report.

~ FINANCIAL COMMITTEES
Public Accounts Committee
This com mittee was set up first in 1921 under
the provisions of the Government of India Act

272
of 191 9 and ha s s ince been in existence. At
present, it co nsists of 22 m e mbers (15 from
th e Lok Sabha and 7 from the Raj ya Sabha).
The members are elected by the Parliam e nt
every year from amongst its members according
to the principle ofproportionai represen ta tion
by mean s of the singl e tra n sferable vote.
Thus, all parties get due represe ntatio n in it.
The term of office ofthe members is one yea r.
A minister ca nnot be elected as a member of
the co mmittee. The chairma n of the co mmittee is a ppoi nted from amongst its m embers
by the Speaker. Un t il 1966 - '67, the chairman
of the committee belonged to the ruling party.
However, since 1967 a convention has developed whe reby the chairma n of the co mmittee
is selected from the Opposition .
The fun ction of the committee is to examine
the annual audit reports of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India (GAG), which are laid
before the Parliam ent by the President. Th e
CAG submi ts three audit reports to the Presi·
den t, na mely, audit report on a ppropriation
accounts, audit report on fi nance accou nts and
audit report on public undertakings.
The comm ittee exa min es publi c expe ndi·
ture not o nly from legal and formal point of
view to discover tech n ica l irreg ularities bu t
also l rom the point of view of economy, pru·
dence, wisdom a nd propri ety to bring out th e
cases of waste, loss, co rruption, extravagan ce,
inefficiency and nugatory expenses.
In more deta il , the fun ct ions of the co m mittee are:
1. Th exa min e the appropriation acco un ts
and the finan ce accounts of the Uni o n
governm en t and any other acco un ts laid
before the Lok Sabha. The appropriation
accounts co mpa re the actua l expendi ture
with th e expe nditure sanctioned by the
Parliament through th e Appropriation
Act, whil e the finan ce accounts shows
the a n nua l receipts a nd di sbursem ents
of the Union Governme n t.
2. In scruti nising the appropriatio n accounts
and the a udit report of CAG o n it, the
committee has to sat isfy itself that
«I) Th e m oney that has been disbursed
was lega ll y ava ilable for the appli ed
se rvice o r purpose

•

(b) The expend iture co nfo rms to th e
a u thority that govern s it
(c) Every re-appropriation has been made
in accordance with the related rules
3. To exam in e the accoun ts of state corpora·
tions, trading con cerns and manufacturing proj ects a nd the a udit re port ofCAG
on them (except those publi c unde rtakings which are a llotted to the Co mmittee
on Publi c Undertakings)
4. 1b exa mine the accounts of autonomous
and se mi·a uto nomo us bod ies, the a udit
of which is condu cted by the CAG
5. 1b co nsider the report of the CAG relating
to the audit of an y rece ipt or to exa mine
the accounts of stores and stocks
6. 1b examine the m oney spent on any ser·
vice during a financia l yea r in excess of
the a m ou nt gran ted by the Lok Sabha for
that purpose
In the fulfillm e nt of the above fu nctions,
t he committee is ass isted by th e CAG. In fact,
the CAG acts as a guide, fri e nd and phil osopher of the co mmittee.
On the rol e played by the co mmi ttee,
Ash ok Cha nda (who him se lf has bee n a CAG
of India) obse rved: "Over a period of years,
the committee has entirely fulfi lled the expectation that it shou ld d eve lop into a powerful
force in th e control of publi c ex penditure. It
may be claimed that the traditions establi shed
a nd co n ventions d eveloped by t he Publi c
Accounts Co mmittee conform to the highest
tradition s of a parliamentary de mocracy."3
However, the effectiveness of t he role of the
co mmittee is limited by the fo ll owing:
(a) It is not concerned with the questions of
poli cy in broader se nse.
(b) It con du cts a post·mortem exa minat io n
of accounts (showing the exp e ndi tu re
already in curred).
(c) It cannot intervene in the matters of dayto-day adm ini stration.
(d) Its reco mm endations are advisor y and
not binding o n the mini stries.
(e) It is not vested wi th the powe r of disaU owance of expenditures by the departments.
3Ashok Cha nda: Indian Administratiol1, George Allen
& Unwin Ltd, London, 1967, p. 180.

Parliamentary Committees

(f) It is not an executive body and hence, can·
not issue an order. Only the Parlia ment
can take a fin al decisi on on its findin gs.

Estim ates Comm ittee
The origin of this comm ittee ca n b e traced
to the standi ng financ ial comm ittee set up
in 1921. The first Estim ates Comm ittee in
the post·i ndepe ndenc e era was co nstitu ted in
1950 on the recom mend ation of John Mathai,
the then financ e minis ter. Origin ally, it h ad
25 memb ers but in 1956 its m ember ship was
raised to 30. All the thirty memb ers are from
Lok Sabha only. The Rajya Sabha has no represent ation in this comm ittee. These members are electe d by the Lok Sabha every year
from among st its own memb ers, accord ing to
the princi ples of propo rtiona l re presen tation
by means of a singl e transf erable vote. Thus,
all partie s get du e represe ntatio n in it. The
term of office is one yea r. A minis ter canno t
be electe d as a member of the co mmittee. The
chairm an of the co mmittee is appoi nted by
the Speaker amon gst its members and hel she
is gener ally from the ruling party.
The functi on of the comm ittee is to examin e the estima tes includ ed in the budge t a nd
sugge st 'econo mies' in public expen diture .
Hen ce, it has been descri bed as a 'conti nuous
econo my comm ittee'.
In m ore deta il, the functi ons of the committee are:
] . 1b report what economies, improvemen ts
in orga nisati on , efficie ncy and admin istrati ve r efo rm con siste nt with the
poli cy under lying the estim ates, can be
affect ed
2. 1b suggest altern ative policies in order to
bring about effi ciency and eco nomy in
admin istrati on
3 . 1b exami n e wheth er the mon ey is well
laid out within the limits of the poli cy
implied in the estima tes
4. 1b suggest the form in which the estim ates are to be presen ted to Parlia ment
The Co mmit tee shall not exerc ise its
functi ons in relat ion to su ch public under taking s as are allotte d to the Comm ittee on
Public Und ertaki ngs.

~, 273

The Co mmit tee may contin ue the exami natio n of the estim ates from time to ti m e,
throu ghout the financ ial yea r and repo rt
to the l-.Iouse as its exam inatio n proce eds. It
sh all not be incum bent on th e Co mmit tee
to exa mine the entire est imate s of anyo ne
yea r. The dema nds for grants may b e finall y
voted des pite the fa ct that the Com m ittee
ha s made n o re port.
However, the effectiven ess of the role of the
comm ittee is limite d by the following:
(a) It exa mines the budge t estim ates only
after they hav e b ee n voted by the
Parlia ment, and not before that.
(b) It ca nnot questi on the policy laid down
by the Parlia m en t.
(c) Its recom mend ation s are adviso ry and
not bindin g on the mini stries.
(d) It exam in es eve ry yea r onl y ce rtain
select ed minis tries and depar tment s.
Thus, by rotatio n, it would cover all of
th em over a numb er of years.
(e) It lacks the exper t assist ance of the CAG
which is available to the Public Accounts
Comm ittee.
(f) Its work is in the nature of a postm ortem .

Comm ittee on Publi c Unde rtakin gs
This comm ittee wa s created in 1964 on the
reco mmen dat ion of the Kri shna Meno n
Co mmitt ee. Origin ally, it had 15 members
( 10 from the Lok Sabha and 5 from the Rajya
Sabha ). Howeve r, in 1974, its m embe rship
was raised to 22 (15 from the Lok Sabha and
7 from th e Rajya Sabha ). The memb ers of
this comm ittee are electe d by the Parlia ment
every year from amon gst its own m embe rs
accord ing to the princi ple of propo rtiona l
repres entati on by mean s of a single transferable vote. Thus, all parties get due repres entation in it. Th e term of office of th e memb ers
is one year. A mini ster ca nnot be electe d as
a memb er of the comm ittee. The chairm an
of the comm ittee is appoi nted by the Speak er
from amon gst its m embers.
The fun ctions of the comm ittee are:
1. 1b exami ne the report s and accou nts of
pub] ic under takings

274

(! Indian Polity

2. 1b examine the reports of the Comptroller
and Auditor General on public undertakings
3. 1b exami n e ( in the context of autono my
and efficien cy of public undertak ings)
wheth er th e affa irs of the publi c undertakings are being m a naged in accordance with so und business principles
and prudent commercial practices
4. 'Ib exercise such other functions vested
in the publi c accounts co mmittee a nd
th e estimates co mmittee in relation to
public underta kings which are allotted
to it by the Speake r from time to tim e
Th e co mmitt ee is no t to exa min e and
investiga te any of the following:
(i) Ma tters of major govern ment policy as
distinct fro m business or commercial
functions of the public undertakings
(ii) Matte rs of day-to-day ad mi nistration
(iii) Matters for the con sideration of wh ich
machinery is establish ed by any sp ecial
sta tute under which a particu lar public
undertaking is established
Further, the effectiveness of the role of th e
com mi ttee is limited by the following:
(a) It can not take up the exam ination of
more than ten to twelve public undertakings in a year.
(b) Its work is in the nature of a post-mortem.
(c) It does not loo k into te chn ica l matters as its m embers a re not technica l
experts.
(d) Its recommendatio ns are advisory and
not binding on the mini stri es.

DEPARTMENT-RELATED
STANDING COMMITTEES
On the recommendation of the Rules Committee of the Lok Sabha, 17 Department-Related
Sta nding Committees (DRSCs) were set up in
the Parliament in 1993. 4 In 2004, seven more
such comm ittees were setup, thus increasing
their number from ] 7 to 24.
41n 1989, th ree ORSCs were constituted which
dealt with Agricu lture, Science & 'ICchnology
and En vironment & Forests. In 1993, they were
superseded by the Department-Related Standing
Committees (DRSCs).

The main objective of the DRSCs is to secure
more accountability of the Executive (i.e., the
Coun cil of Ministers) to the Parliament, particularly fi nancial accountability. They also assist
the Parliament in debating the budget more
effectively.s The 24 DRSCs cover under their
jurisd iction all the ministries/ departments of
th e Centra l Government.
Each DRSC cons ists of 31 members (21
from Lok Sa bha and 10 from Rajya Sabha).
The members of the Lok Sabha are nominated by the Spea ker from amongst its own
members, just as the members of the Rajya
Sabha are nominated by the Chairm an from
a mongst its members. s A minister is not eligibl e to b e nominated as a member of any of
the DRSCs. In case a member, after his/ her
nomination to any of the DRSCs, is appointed
a minister, he/ she then ceases to be a memb er of the comm ittee. The term of office of
each DRSC is one year from the date of its
co nstitu tion .
Out of the 24 DRSCs, 8 work under the
Rajya Sabha and 16 under the Lok Sabha. The
24 DRSCs and the ministries/ departm ents
placed under th eir jurisdiction a re shown
below in Table 24.1.
The functions of each of the DRSCs are:
1. To co n sider the dema nds for grants of
the concerned ministries/ departments
before they are di scu ssed and voted
in the LokSabha. Its report should not
5While inaugurating the DRSC system in the Central
Hall of Parliament on 31st March 1993, the then VicePresident of India and the Chairman of Rajya Sabha,
KR Narayanan observed that the main purpose of
these Committees is: kto ensure the accountability
of Government to Parliament through more detailed
consideration of measures in these Committees.
The intention is not to weaken or criticise the
administration but to strengthen it by investing it
with more meaningful Parliament.uy su pport~.
ti.rill 13th Lok Sabha, each ORSC consisted of not
more than 45 members - 30 to be nominated by the
Speaker from a mongst th e members of Lok Sabha
a nd 15 to be nominated by the Chairman from
amongst th e members of Rajya Sabha. However,
\\>ith restructuring of DRSCs in July 2004, each
DRSC con sists of 31 members - 21 from Lok Sabha
and 10 from Rajya Sabha.

Parliamentary Cammittees
Table 24.1
"

51. No.

~ 275

Department-Related Standing Committees and their Jurisdiction

Name of the Committees

Ministries/Departments Covered

I.

Committees under Rajya Sabha

1.

Committee on Commerc;e

Commerce and Industry

2.

Committee on Home Affairs

(1) Home Affairs
(2) Development of North-Eastern Region

3.

COmmtltee on Education. Women, Children.
Youth and SPOrts •

(1) Education

(2) Youth Aff.,,. and Spor1S

-

(3) Women and Child Development
4.

Committee on Industry

(1) Heavy Industries
(2) Micro, Small and Me di um Enterprises

5.

Committee on Science & Technology.
Envtronment. Forest and CHmate change

(1) Sdence and Technology
(2) Space '
(3) Earth Sciences
(4) Atomic Energy

(S) Envtronment. Forest and Olmate Change

6.

Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture

--"-

(1) Civil Aviation
(2) Road Transport & Highways
(3) Ports, Shipping and Waterways
(4) Culture
(5) Tourism

7.

8.

Committee on HQtth.& Family Welfare

(1) Health and Family Welfare
(2) Ayurveda. Yoga and NabJrcpothy. Unani. Slddha and
Homoeopathy (AYUSH)

Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,

(1) Law and Justice
(2) Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions

Law and Justice

IL CommttliMl under Lok Sebha
(1) Agricu lture and Farmers' We lfare
(2) Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairing
(3) Food Processing Industries
(4) Cooperation

9.

Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry
and Food Processing

10.

COmmittee on Communications and Informatlon

(1) Comm!Jnlcations

Technology

(2) Electronics & Infonnatlon Technology
(3) Information & BroadCasting

11 .

Committee on Defence

Defence

12.

Committee on Energy

(1) New and Renewabie Energy
(2) Power

13.

Committee on External Affairs

External Affairs

14.

Committee on Finance

(1) FInance
(2) Corporate Affairs
(3) Planning (NIT! Aayog)

(4) Statistics and Programme Implementation
15.

Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and
Public Distribution

Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution

276

,r;J Indian Polity

SI No

Name of the Committees

Mlnlstnes/Departments Covered

Committee on labour, Textiles and Skill
Development

(1) labour & Employment
(2) Textiles
(3) Skill Development & Entrepreneurship

17.

Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas

Petroleum and Natural Gas

'8

Committee on Railways

RaIlways

'9.

Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs

Housing and Urban Affairs

Committee on Water Resources

Jal Shakti

Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers

Chemicals and Fertilizers

Committee on Rural Development and
Panchayati Raj

(1) Rural Development
(2) Panchayatl Raj

23.

Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel

(1) Coal
(2) Mines
(3) Steel

24.

Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment

(1) Social Justice and Empowerment
(2) Tribal Affairs
(3) Minority Affairs

'6.

I

\20

2' .

suggest anything of the nature of cut

motions

2 . 1b examine bills pertaining to the concerned ministries/ departments
3. 1b consider annual reports of ministries/
departments
4. 1b consider national basic long-term policy documents presented to the Houses
The following limitations are imposed on
the functioning of these DRSCs:
(i) They should not consider the matters of
day·to-day administration of the concerned ministries/departments.
(ii) They should not generally consider the
matters which are considered by other
parliamentary committees.
It should be noted here that the recommendations of these committees are advisory in nature
and hence not binding on the Parliament.
The following procedure shall be followed
by each of the DRSCs in their consideration of
the demands for grants, and making a report
thereon to th~ Houses.
(a) Afte~ general discussion on the bu~get in
the Houses is over, the Houses shall be
adjourned for a fixed period.

(b) The committees shall consider the
demands for grants of the concerned
ministries during the aforesaid per-iod.
(e) The committees shall make their report
within the period and shall not ask fOT
mOTe time.
(d) The demands for grants shall be considered by the House in the light of the
reports of the committees.
.
(e) There shall be a separate report on the
demands for grants of each ministry.
The following procedure shall be followed
by each of the DRSCs in examining the bills
and making report thereon.
(a) The committee shall consider the general
principles and clauses of bills referred
to it.
(b) The Committee shall consider only such
bills as introduced in either of the
Houses and referred to it.
(c) The Committee shall make report on bills
in a given time.
The merits of the DRSC system in the Parliament are:
(1) Their proceedings are devoid of any party
bias.

Parliamentary Committees

,

r,

,..'

,

(2) ~ The procedure adopted by them is more
flexible than in the Lok Sabha.
(3) The system makes parliamentary
control over executive much more
detailed, close, continuous, in-depth and
co mprehensive.
(4) The system ensures economy and efficiency in public expenditure as the ministries/ departments would now be more
careful in fonnulating their demands.
(5) They' facilitate opportunities to all the
members of Parliament to participate
and understand the functioning of the
government and contribute to it.
(6) They can avail of expert opinion or public
opinion to make the reports. They are
authorised to invite experts and eminent
persons to testify before them and incorporate their opinions in their reports.
(7) The opposition parties and the Raj ya
Sabha ca n now playa greater role in
exercising financial control over the
executive.
The DRSC system has influenced the
fun ctioning of the executive in a significant
manner. The recommendations made by the
DRSCs have been of immense importance. It
has bee,n found that the ministries/ department within the purview ofthese committees
have been quite receptive to their recommendations and have, by and large, accepted
them and initiated suitable action for their
implementation. There have been very few
instances where the ministries/departments
have co nvin c i~gly expressed their inability
to implement the recommendations of the
committees 7 •
The DRSCs have made parliamentary
debates better informed by nourishing the
information supply system. The effectiveness of these committees can be judged on
four yardsticks, namely, (i) their success in
holding officials to account, (ii) publication of information, (iii) their effect on the
House and the wider public, and (iv) th eir
'Committee System i~ Rajya Sabha: An Introduction,
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 2003, pp. 29-30.

~ 2n

influence on government's decisions. Going
by any of the criteria, one can emphatically
say that DRSCs have proved their worth. The
activities of these committees have created
a "corpus of knowledge" for membe rs of the
Parliament and public, which otherwise
would not have been possible. The discussion and debates in such co mmittees and
the reports they produce further sharpen
government poHciesB•

t COMMITTEES TO INQUIRE
Committee on Petitions
This committee examines petitions on bills and
on matters of general public importance. It also
entertains representations from individuals and
associations on matters pertaining to Union
subjects. The Lok Sabha committee consists of
15 members, while the Raj ya Sabha committee
consists of 10 members.

Committee of Privileges
The functions of thi s committee are semijudicial in nature. It examines the cases
of breach of privileges of the House and
its members and reco mmends appropriate
action. The Lok Sabha committee has 15
m e mbers, while the Rajya Sabha co mmittee
ha s 10 members.

.

Ethics Committee
This committee was constituted in Rajya
Sabha in 1997 and in Lok Sabha in 2000. It
enforces the code of co nduct of members of
Parliament. It examines the cases of misco nduct and recommends appropriate action.
Thus, it is engaged in maintaining discipline
and decorum in Parliament. The Lok Sabha
committee has )5 members, while the Rajya
Sabha committees has 10 members.

8Thid.

278

P

Indian Polity

COMMITTEES TO SCRUTINISE
AND CONTROL
Committee on Government Assu rances
This co mmittee examines th e assurances,
promises and undertakings given by ministers from time to time on the floor of the
House and reports on the extent to which
they have been carr ied through. In the Lok
8abha, it cons ists of 15 members and in the
Rajya Sabha, it consists of 10 members. It was
constituted in 1953.

Committee on Subordinate Legislation
This committee examines and reports to the
House whether the powers to make regulations, rules, sub-rules and bye-laws delegated
by the Parliament or con ferred by the Constitution to the Executive are being properl y
exercised by it. In both the I-louses, the committee consists of 15 members. It was constituted in 1953.

Committee on Papers Laid on the Table
This co mmittee was con stituted in 1975. The
Lok Sa bha Committee has 15 members, while
the Rajya 8abha Committee has ]O members.
It examines all papers laid on the table of
the Hou se by ministers to see whether they
comply with provisions of the Consti tution,
or the related Act or Rule. It does not exam ine
statutory notifications and orders that fa ll
under the jurisdiction of the Co mmittee on
Subordinate Legislation.

Committee on Welfare of SCs and STs
This comm ittee consists of 30 members (20
from Lok Sabha and 10 fro m Rajya Sabha ).
lts functions are: (i) to co nsider the reports
of the Nationa l Co mmi ss ion for the 8Cs and
the Nat ional Commission for the STh; ( ii ) to
examine all matters relating to the welfare of
8Cs and 8Th, like implementation of constitutional and statutory safeguards, working of
welfare programmes, etc.

Committee on Empowerment of Women
This comm ittee was co n stituted in 1997 and
co nsists of 30 members (20 from Lok Sabha
a nd 10 from Raj ya Sah ha). It considers :the
reports of the National Commiss ion for
Women and exam in es the measures taken
by the Union Governmen t to sec ure status,
dignity and equa lity for women in all fields.

Joint Committee on Offices of Profit
This comm ittee examines the composition
and character of committees and other bodi es
appointed by the Central, state and union territory governm ents and recommends whether
persons holding these offices should be disqualified from being elected as members of
Parliament or not. It consists of 15 membe rs
( 10 from Lok Sa bha and 5 from Rajya Sabha )_

COMMITTEES RELATING TO
THE DAY-TO-DAY BUSINESS
OFTHEHOUSE
Business Advisory Committee
This co mmi ttee reg ulates the programme
and time table of the House. It allocates time
for the tra n sact ion of leg islati ve and other
business brought before the House by the
government. The Lok Sabha comm ittee co nsists of 15 members including the Speake r as
its chairman. In the Rajya Sa bha, it has 11
members including the Chairman as its exofficio chairman .

Committee on Private Members ' Bills
and Resolutions
This committee classifies bills and a llocates
time for the discussion on bills and resolutions introduced by pri va te members (other
than mini sters). This is a special com mittee
of the Lok Sab ha and consists of 15 members
includin g the Deputy Speaker as its cha irman. The Rajya Sabha does not have any such
committee. The sa me funct ion in the Rajya

"

-

Parliamentary (:ommittees

Sabha is performed by the Busin ess Advisory
Committee of that House.

Rules Committee
This committee considers the matters of procedure and condu ct of business in the House
and recommends necessary amendments or
additi6ns to the rul es of the House. The Lok
Sahha committee co n sists of 15 me mbers
including the Speaker as its ex-officio chairman. In the Rajya Sabha, it con sists of 16
members including the Chairman as its exofficio chairman.

Committee on Absence of Members from
the Sittings ofthe House
This committee co n siders a11 applications
from members for leave of absence from
the sittings of the House, and examines the
cases of members who have been abse nt for
a period of 60 days or more without pe rmission. It is a special co mmittee of the Lok
Sabh a and co nsists of 15 members. There is
no such co mmittee in the Rajya Sabha and
al1 such m atters are dealt by the House itself.

~ 279

like food, medical aid, etc., accorded to fh em
in their houses and hostels in Delhi. Both
the Houses have their respective House Committees. In the Lok Sabha, it oonsists of 12
members. In the Rajya Sabha, it 'co nsists of
10 members.

Library Committee
This co mmittee considers all matters relating
to library of the Pa rliament and assists the
members in utilis ing the library 'S services.
It con sists of 9 me mbers (6 from Lok Sabha
and 3 from Rajya Sabha).

Joint Committee on Salaries and
Allowances of Members of Parliament
This co mmittee wa s constituted under th e
Salary, Al10wances and Pension of Members
of Parliament Act, 1954 . It co n sists of 15
members (10 from Lok Sabha and 5 from
Rajya Sa bha). It frames rul es for regulating
pay ment of salary, allowances and pension to
members of Parlia ment.

~ HOUSE-KEEPING COMMITTEES

~ CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEES

General Purposes Committee

Co n sultati ve committees a re atta ch ed to
various ministries/ departm ents of the Central Government. They consist of m embers of
both the Houses of Parliament. The Minister!
Minister of State in charge of the Ministry
co ncerned acts as the cha irman of the consultative co mmittee of that ministry.
These co mmittees provide a forum for
informal di scussions between th e mini sters
a nd the members of Parliament on policies
and programmes of the government and the
manner of their implementation.
These co mmittees are constituted 'by the
Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs. The guidelines regarding the composition, functions
and procedures of these committees are formulated by this Mini stry. The Ministry also makes
arrangements for holding their meetings
both during the sess ion and the inter-session
period of Parliament.

This committee considers and advises on matters concerning affairs of the House, which do
not fa11 within the jurisdictio n of any other
parliamentary committee. In each House, this
committee consists of the presiding officer
(Speaker/Chairman) as its ex-officio chairman , Deputy Speaker (Deputy Chairma n in
the case of Rajya Sabha ) , m embers of panel
of chairpersons (panel of vice-chairpersons
in the case of Rajya Sabha), chairperso ns of
all the de partmental sta nding co mmittees of
the House, leaders of recognised parties a nd
groups in the House and such other members
as nominated by the presidin g officer.

House Committee
This committee deal s with residential accommodation of members and other amenities

280 ,(llnd;an Pality
The membership of these committees is
voluntary and is left to the choice of the
members and the Icadc'Ts of their parties. The
maximum membership of a committee is 30
and the minimum is 10.
These comm ittees are constituted after a new
Lok Sabha is constituted, after General Elections
for the Lok Sabha. In other words, these committees shall stand dissolved upon dissolution

of every Lok &'lbha and shall be reconstituted
upon constitution of each Lok Sabha.
In addition, separate Informal Consultative
Committees of the members of ParHament
are also constituted for a ll the Railway Zones.
The members of Parliament belonging to the
area fa llin g under a particular Railway Zone
are nominated on the In forma l Consult.ative
Committee of that Railway Zo ne.

,-

CHAP :1iER

25

Indian Parliamentary
Group

~ RATIONALE OF THE IPO
M.N. Kaul and S.L. Shakd her have nicely
explai ned the ration ale of the Indian Parliamenta ry Group (IPG) in the following way,·
The establ ishme nt and develo pment of relations amon g parlia ments consti tutes part of
the regula r activities of nation al parlia ments .
Altho ugh promo tion of inter-parlia menta ry
relatio ns has for many years been a signif icant
part afthe work ofparJ iamen tarian s, recent ly it
has received a new thrust due to the increa sed
inter- depen dence of nation s in a global environme nt. It is imperative that parlia menta rians
will join hands to safeguard democ racy and
work in synerg y to confro nt the challe nges
before the world and conve rt them into opportunitie s to facilitate peace and prosp erity in
their count ries as well as global ly.I
Inter-parlia menta ry relatio ns thus assum e
great impor tance today when the whole world
is beset with many pressi ng proble ms. The
proble ms that are faced by one parlia ment
today may confr ont anoth er tomor row. It is,
theref ore, essen tial that a link shoul d exist
betwe en variou s , p--1l.'?1t1,en ts of the world.
This link is .r o;- ' ·t ~~ ,~ India throug h the
,!!,' !.l• •dt tge' of h(;g~!~ms) oodwi11 missio
ns,
corres ponde nce, dot.'Ur ents, etc. with foreig n
parlia ments throug h the mach inery of the
IPG tnat acts both as the Natio nal Group of
the Inter-Parlia menta ry Union (IPU) and also
as the India Branc h of the Comm onwea lth
Parlia menta ry Assoc iation (CPA).l
l M .N . Kaul and S.L. Shakdh er, Practice and Procedure

of Parliament, Lok Sahha Secretariat, Sixth Edition ,
2009, p. 1160.
2lbid.

~ COM POSI TION OF THE IPO
The IPG is an auton omou s body. It was
forme d in the year 1949 in pursu ance of a
motio n adopt ed by the Const ituent Assem bly
(Legis lative) ?
The memb ership of IPG is open to all
memb ers of Parlia ment. The forme r ' members of Parlia ment can also becom e associ ate
memb ers ofthe IPG. 4 But, the associ ate members are entitle d to limite d rights only. They
are not entitle d to repres entati on at meeti ngs
and confe rences of the IPU and the CPA. They
are also not entitle d to the travel conce ssions
provid ed to memb ers by certai n b ranch es of
the ·CPA.

The Speak er of the Lok Sabha is the ex officio
Presid ent of the IPG. The Deput y Speak er of
the Lok Sabha and the Deput y Chain nan of the
Rajya Sabha are the eft officio vice-p reside nts
of the IPG. The Secret ary-G eneral of the Lok
Sabha acts as the eft officio Secret ary-G eneral
of the IPG.

~ OBJECTIVES OF THE IPO
The aims and object s of the IPG are mentioned below:
1. 1b promo te perso nal conta ct betwe en
memb ers of the Parlia ment of India.
2. 1b study quest ions of publi c impor tance that are likely to come up before
the Parlia ment ; arran ge semin ars,
~e concer ned motion was adopte d on August 16,
1948.

4A memb er or ex·me mber of Parliam ent can becom e
a life memb er of the IPG on payme nt of a fixed life
subscr iption.

282

,(J Indion Polity

di scuss ions and orie n tation courses; a nd
brin g out publications for the di sse mi·
na tio n of information to the members
of the IPG.
•
_
3. 1b arra nge lectures on poli tica l, defence,
economic, soc ial and educat ional prob·
lem s by the me mbers of the Parliamen t
a nd distinguished perso ns.
4 . 1b arran ge visi ts to fore ign countri es with
a view to develop contacts with members
of other parliam e nts.

r FUNCTIONS OF THE IPG
The vario us fun ct io ns performed and a cti vities undertake n by the lJ)G arc as fol1ows:
I . The IPG acts as a link be twee n the
Parliament of India a nd the vario us
parliaments of the world. This link is
maintained through the exc ha nge of
de legatio ns, goodwill mi ss ion s, co rrespondence, docum e nts, etc. with foreign
parl ia me nts.
2. The IPG functions as the (3) Natio na l
Group of th e IP U and (b) main branch
of the CPA in Indi a.
3. Addresses to the membe rs of the Parliame nt by vis itin g Heads of State and
Government of fore ign countries a nd
ta lks by emin ent pe rson s a re arranged
under the a uspices of the IPG.
4. Se m in ars a nd sympos ia on pa rlia mentary
subjects of topical interest a re organised
per iodica ll y at natio na l as well as internati o nal leve l.
5. Members of the tPG, when visiting abroad,
are given letters of introduction to t he
Secretaries of the Natio nal Groups of the
IP U and Secreta ries of th e CPA branc hes.
The India n Missions in the countries of
visit are a lso suita bly informed so as to
e nabl e them to get assistance a nd usual
courtesies.
6. On ly those me mbe rs of the Parliament
who a re me mbe rs of the IPG of at least
six month s' sta nding at the tim e of the
co mpos iti on of the del ega tion, may be
included in the lndi a n Parliamentary
de legat ion s to forei gn co un tries.

7. An uninter rupted flow of information
to me mbe rs rega rding the activities of
t he IPC is ma intained through the IPG
Newslette r brought ou t every quarte r. It
is se nt regu larly to a ll members of the
l PG, including associate me mbers.
8. As per the decisio n of the lPG , an award
of Outsta ndin g Pa rli amentarian was
instituted in the year 1995 to b e give n
an nua ll y. A co mmittee of fi ve pe rso ns,
co n st ituted by th e Speaker of t he Lok
Sabha, in vites and fina lises the nomination for t he awa rd .

PARLIAMENTARY FRIENDSHIP
GROUPS
1b e n cou rage bilatera l re lations, the IP G
co nsti tutes Pa rliam e ntary Friendship Grou ps
( PFGs) with othe r cou ntries, in the Indi a n
Parliament.
Eac h PFG co nsists of sitting mem be rs of
Parliame nt (both from the Lok Sabha and th e
Rajya Sabha). T he Speaker of the Lok Sabha
ap po ints th e President of each PFG.
The manage me nt and co ntrol of all affa irs
of the PFGs vests in the IPG. The meetings of
the PFCs are arranged on the sidelines of visiting Foreign Parliam e ntary Friendship Groups/
Co mm ittees/ Delegation s. These meeti ngs are
he ld within the Parliament House complex.
The aims and obj ectives of the PFG s are
mentioned be low:
1. 1b maintain po litica l, economic, social
and cultu ra l co ntact between the two
co untri es.
2. 1b create f.:'lvollrable condition s for con tinuous development of in ter·Pa rli amentary
co ntents, especia lly in the organisation of
ta lks, mutual exchanges a nd co-ope ration
between the two Parliaments.
3. 1b assist in having exchanges of info rm ation a nd expe ri e nces on issues re lated to
Pa rliam e ntary activ ities.
4. 1b promote co-opera tion between th e
de legations of the two cou ntri es while
parti cip ating in t he de liberations of
inte rnational orga ni sation s and also in

1

Indian Parliamentary Group

'-

'carrying out consultations on issues of
mutual interest.
5. 1b increase ties between the member
countries.

t THJ; (PC AND (PUs

~.

J

,

•

1
I

The IPU ' js an international organisation of
the par1iaments of sovereign states. At present, the IPU consists of 179 parliaments of
sovereign nations. Its aim is to work for peace
and cooperation among peoples and for the
firm establishment of representative institutions. It fosters contacts, coordination and the
exchange of experience among parliaments
and parliamentarians of all member countries and contributes to better knowledge of
the working of representative institutions.
It also expresses its views on a11 burning
questions of international importance for
necessary effective implementation of parliamentary actions and suggests avenues for
improving the working standard and capacity
of international institutions.
The main advantages of membership of the
lPG, insofar as its functions as the National
Group of the IPU are concerned, are as follows:
1. It help8 members of the Indian Parliamentary delegations to develop contacts
with the parliamentarians of the member countries of the IPU.
2 . The events provide an opportunity to
study and understand contemporary
changes/reforms taking place in various
countries of the world.
3. It provides facilities to meet parliamentarians in different countries during tours
in abroad.
4 . The members of the IPG are eligible to
visit foreign countries as members of
the Indian Parliamentary delegations to
Inter-Parliamentary Conferences.
Further, members of the IPG have been
holding various positions in the fPU bodies,
SHand Book for Members of Lok Sabha, Fifteenth
Edition, 2009, pp. 207-208.

I
1

~, 283

namely, office bearers in -different committees of the IPU, Rapporteurs, Chairman of
Drafting Committees, etc. and by virtue of the
same, the IPG has been successful'in putting
forward effectively the vieWpoint .of India
on various important issues·dealt jn the fPU
meetings.
•

. .I

t .THE (PC AND CPA

•

6

•

The CPA is an association of about 17000 Parliamentarians and Parliamentary staff spread
over 180 National, State, Provincial and Thrritorial Parliaments and Legislatures in S3
Commonwealth countries. Its aims are to
promote knowledge and understanding of the
constitutional, legislative, economic, social
and cultural systems within a parliamentary
democratic framework with particular reference to the countries of the Commonwealth
of Nations and to countries having close historical and parliamentary associations with
it. Its mission is to promote the advancement
of parliamentary democracy by enhancing
knowledge and understanding of democratic
governance and by building an informed
parliamentary community able to deepen the
Commonwealth's democratic commitment
and to further co-operation among its parliaments and legislatures .
The main advantages of membership of
the lPG, insofar as its functions as the main
branch of the CPA in India are concerned, are
as follows:
J. Conferences and Seminars: Membership
provides an opportunity for participation in the plenary and regional conferences, seminars, visits and exchanges of
delegations.
2. Publications: All members of the IPG
are entitled to receive, free of charge,
'The Parliamentarian' quarterly and the
newsletter, 'First Reading', every second
month. 7
6 lbid, pp. 208-209.

7These are published by the CPA Secretariat, London.

284

P

Indian Polity

3. Information: The Parli ame nta r y
Information and Refe ren ce Centre of the
CPA Secretariat provides information to
me mbers on pa rliam entary, con stitu·
tion al a nd "Commonwea lth matters.
4. Introductions: The CPA bra nches readil y assist in arranging introdu ct ion s for
members visiting other jurisdictio ns.
5. Parliamentary Facilities: Me mbe rs visitin g other Co mmonwea lth co untri es

are normall y acco rded parliamentary
courtes ies, espec iall y access to debates
and local members.
6. Travel Facilities: Some branches provide
for a designated number of their members annually to undertake study tours
of Co mmonwea lth and oth er co untries
to com pa re political and procedural
deve lopments. Other bra nches arra nge
ad hoc visits.

.

CHAPTER '

26

U

nlike the American Constitution the
Indian Constitution ha s estab1i~hed
an integrated judicial system with the
Supreme Court at the top and the high courts
below it. Under a high court (and below the
state level), there is a hierarchy of subordinate courts, that is, district courts and other
lower courts. This single system of courts,
adopted from the Government of India Act
of 1935, enforces both Central laws as well as
th e state laws. In USA, on the other hand, the
federal laws are enforced by the federal judic iary and the state laws arc enforced by
the state judiciary. There is thus a double
system of courts in USA-onc for the centre
and the other for the states. Tb sum up, India,
a1though a federa l cou ntry like the USA, ha s
a unified judiciary and one syste m of fundamental law and justice.
The Supreme Court of India was inaugurated on January 28, 1950. It succeeded the
Federal Court of India, established under th e
·Government of India Act of 1935. However,
the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is
greater than that of its predecessor. This is
because, the Supreme Court has replaced the
British Privy Council as the highest court of
appeal.!
Articles 124 to 147 in Part V of the Constitution deal with the organisation, independence,
Jurisdiction, powers, procedures and so on of
the Supreme Court. Th e Parliament is also
authorised to regulate them.

IBefore 1950, the British Privy Council had thcjurisdiction to hear appeals from India.

Supreme Court

1

COMPOSITION AND
. APPOINTMENT

At present, the Supreme Court consists of
thirty-fou r judges (one chief justice and thirty
three other judges). Originally, the strength of
the Supreme Court was fixed at eight (one chief
justice and seven other judges). The Parliament
has increased this number of other judges progressively to ten in 1956, to thirteen in 1960,
to seventeen in 1977, to twenty-five in 1986, to
thirty in 2008 and to thirty-three in 2019.
Th e various Acts relating to the composition of the Supreme Court are summarised in
Thble 26.2.
Appoi ntme nt of Judges The judges of the
Supreme Court are appointed by the President.
The chief justice is appointed by the President
after con sultation with such judges of the
Supreme Court and high courts as he/she deems
necessary. The other judges are apPointed by
President after consultation with the chief justice and such other judges of the Supreme Court
and the high courts as he/she deems necessary.
The consultation with the chief justice is obligatory in the case of apPOintment of a judge other
than Chief justice.

Controversy over Consultation The Supreme
Court has given different interpretation of the
word 'consultation' in the above provision. In
the Firs< ,udges ease" (1981), the Court held
that consultation does not mean concurrence
las.p' Gupta VS. Union ofllldia (1981).

286

(J

Indian Polity

and it onl y impli es exc hange of views. But,
in the Seco/ld Juelges case II) (1993) , th e Court
reversed its ea rlier nilin g and ch il nged the
mea nin g of the wo rd co nsul tat io n to co ncurren ce. Hence, it ruled that the advice tendered
by the Chi ef Justi ce of India is binding o n the
President in the matters of appointment of the
j udges of th e Suprem e Co urt. Bu t, the Chi ef
Ju st ice wou ld te nder hi s/ he r a dvice on th e
matter after consul ting two of his/ he r se niormost co ll eagues. Sim ilarl y, in the TlI ird Judges
case 2 ( 1998), th e Court o pin ed that the consul tatio n process to be adopted by t he Chi ef justice of India requires 'consu ltatio n of pl urality
judges'. Th e so le opinion of t he c hief justi ce
of In dia does not co nstitute t he consultat ion
process. He/ she should co nsult a collegium of
four se nio rm ost judges of the Supre me Co urt
and even if two j udges give an adverse o pini on,
he/ she should not send th e reco mm e nda tion
to t he gove rnm ent. The court held t hat the
reco mm e ndation made by t he chi ef j ust ice of
Ind ia withou t co mpl y in g with the no rm s a nd
requ ire men ts of the co nsulta tion process a re
no t bindin g on the governme nt.
T he 99th Co nstitutional Amend me nt Act of
2014 and the Nat iona l Ju dici al Appointm e nts
Co mmiss io n Ac ( of 201 4 have re pl aced the
COllegium system of appointing judges to the
Supreme Cou rt and Hi gh Courts with a new
body ca ll ed the National Judi c ial Appointments Co mmi ssion (NJ AC). However, in 20] 5,
the Supre me Court has declared both th e 99th
Con stitutional Ame ndm en t as well a s the
NJAC Act as un co nstitutional and vo id. Consequ e ntl y, th e earlier coll egi um system beca me
operative aga in. Thi s verdi ct was deli vered by
the Supre me Co urt in the Fourth Judges case2n
(201 5). The court opined that the new syste m
IbSup reme Coun Advocates-on-Record Association
vs. Union of In dia ( 1993).
21n Rc-P rcsidc ntial Refercn cc ( 1998) . The Prcsident
sought the Supreme Court's opinion ( under Article
143) o n ccrtain doubts over the Cons ultation process to be adopted by the chie f justice of India as
stipulated in the 1993 C,ISt'_
2;oSuprc me Co urt Advocat es-o n-Rccord Association
vs. Uni on of Ind ia (2015).

(i .e., NJAC) wou ld affect the independence of
the judi c iary.
Appointment of Chief Justice From 1950
to 1973, the practi ce ha s bee n to a ppo int the
se niormost judge of the Suprem e Court as the
chief just ice of India . Th is established con ve ntio n was viola ted in ] 973 when A.N. Ray was
appointed as th e Chi e f Justice of Ind.i bv
superseding three senior judges. 3 Again in 1977,
M .U. Beg was appointed as the chief justice
of Ind ia by superseding the the n senior-most
j udge. 4 Th is di sc retion of the gove rnm ent was
curta iled by the Supreme Cou rt in the Second
Judges case (1993), in whi ch the Supreme Court
ruled that th e sen ionnost j udge of the Supreme
Cou rt should a lone be appOinted to the office
of t he chi ef j ustice of India.

QUALIFICATIONS, OATH
AND SALARIES
Qualifications of Judges A pe rson to be
appo in ted as a judge of th e Supre me Co urt
should have the following quali fication s:
1. He/ she should be a citi zen of In dia.
2. (a) He/ she should have been a judge ofa
High Court (or hi gh courts in succession)
fo r five years; or (b) He / she sho uld have
bee n an advocate ofa High Court (or High
Courts in success ion ) for ten yea rs; or
(c) He/ she should be a di stingui shed
jurist in the o pinion of the Preside nt.
Fro m the above, it is clea r that t he Con st itution ha s not prescribed a minimum age for
a ppointm ent as a judge of the Supreme Cou rt.
l A.N . Ray was fourth in seniority. T he three supersededjudges were J.r..'1. Shelat, K.S. Begue and A.N.
Grovcr.. AII the threc judges res igncd from the Suprem e Court. They were supersedcd due to their
judgement in KesauliIuwda B/!(IJ'(lli case ( 1973),
whic h was n ot favo u rable to the Govcrnmen t.
4 H e was H.R. Khanna a nd he too res ig ned. Hi s
d isscnting j udge ment upho lding the ri ght to life
evcn during emergency in the ADM j(lba/pur vs.
Si livkcwt Silllkia case ( 1976) was not appreciated by
t hc Gove rnm c nt.

Supreme Court

Oath or Affirmation A person appointed as
a judge of the Supreme Court, before entering upon his/her Office, has to make and
subscribe an oath or affirmation before the
President, or some person appointed by him /
her for this purpose. In his/ her oath, a judge
of the Supreme Court swears:
1. to bear true faith and al1egiance to the
Constitution of India;
2. to uphold the sovereignty and integrity
of India;
3. to duly and faithfully and to the best of
his/ her ability, knowledge and judgement
perfonn the duties of the Office without
fear or favour, affection or il1-\vill; and
4. to uphold the Constitution and the laws.
Salaries and Allowances The salaries, allowances, privileges, leave and pensio n of the
judges of the Supreme Court are determined
from time to time by the Parliament. They
cannot be varied to their disadvantage after
their appointment except during a financial
emergency. In 2018, the salary of the chief
justice was increased from fl lakh to ~2.80
lakh per month and that of a judge from
~90,OOO to U.SO lakh per month'. They are
also paid sumptuary allowance and provided
with free accommodation and other facilities
like medical, car, telephone, etc.
The retired chief justice and judges are
entitled to 50 per cent of their last drawn
salary as monthly pension.

t TENURE AND REMOVAL
Tenure of Judges The Constitution has not
fixed the tenure of a judge of the Supreme
SIn 1950, their sa laries were fixed at ~5,000 per
month and f4,000 per month respectively. In 1986,
their salaries were raised to flO,OOO per month and
t9,000 per month respectively. In 1998, their salaries were raised to f33,OOO per month and t30,000
per month respectively. In 2009, their salaries were
raised to tl lakh per month and t90,000 per month
respectively.

~ 287

Court. However, it makes the following three
provisions in this regard:
1. He/she holds office until he/she attains
the age of 65 years. Any question regarding
hislher age is to be detenn ined by such
authority and in such manner as provided
by Parliament.
2. He/she can resign from his/her office by
writing to the President.
3. He/ she can be removed from his/ her
office by the President on the recom·
mendation of the Parliament.
Removal of'Judges A judge of the Supreme
Court can be removed from his/ her Office by
an order of the President. The President can
issue the removal order only after an address
by Parliament has been presented to him / her
in the same session for such remova1. The
address must be supported by a special major·
ity of each House of Parliament (ie, a majority of the total membership of that House and
a majority of not less than two-thirds of the
members of th at House present and voting).
The grounds of remova l are two-proved mis·
behaviour or incapacity.
The Judges Enquiry Act (196B) regulates
the procedure relating to the removal of a
judge of the Supreme Court by the process of
impeachment6 :
}. A removal motion signed by 100 members (in the case of Lok Sabha) or SO
members (in the case of Rajya Sabha)
is to be given to the Speaker/Chairman.
2. The Speaker/ Chairman may admit the
motion or refuse to admit it.
3. If it is admitted, then the Speaker/
Chairman is to constitute a three-member
comm ittee to investigate into the charges.
4. The committee should consist of (a) the
chief justice or a judge of the Supreme
Court, (b) a chief justice of a high court,
and (c) a distinguished jurist.
&.rhe word 'impe.lchment' is not used in the constitution in relation to the removal .of judges.
However, it-is used only in the case of the removal
of the President. '.t .v" tne ~ ...c vi ! '1 t ':- ' .... ,

288

if'

Indian Polity

5. If the co mm it tee finds the judge to be
guilty of misbe haviour or suffering from
an inca pa city, the House can take up the
consideratio n of the motion.
6. After th e motion is passed by each I-louse
of Pilf li a mcnt by special major ity, a n
address is prese nted to the President for
removal of the judge.
7. Fina ll y, the Pres ident passes a n order
removing the judge.
It is interesting to kn ow that no judge of
the Su pre me Co urt has bee n impeached so
far. Th e first case of impeac hment is that of
Justice V. Ramaswami of the Supreme Co urt
( 1991-1993). Though th e enquiry Co mmi ttee
found him / her gu ilty of misbehaviour, he/ she
co uld not be removed as the impeachment
1110tion was defeated in the Lok Sab ha. The
Co ngress Party absta ined fro m vot ing.

ACTING, ADHOC
AND RETIRED JUDGES
Act ing Chief Justice The President ca n
appoint a j udge of the Supreme Cou rt as an
actin g Chief Justice of India when:
1. the office of Chief Justice oflndia is vacant;
or
2. the Chi ef Ju sti ce of Indi a is temporarily
absent; or
3. the Chief J ust ice of IndiH is unabl e to
perform the duties of his/ her office.
Ad hoc Judge When there is a lac k of quonlln
of the pennanent judges to hold or contin ue
any session of the Sup reme Court, the Chi ef
Justice of In dia ca n appo i nt a judge of a High
Court as an ad hoc judge of the Supreme Court
for a temporHry period. He/ she can do so only
after con sul tatio n with the chief justice of
the Hi gh Co urt concerned and with the previo us co nsent of the President. The judge so
appoi nted should be qua lified for a ppointment
as a j udge of the Supreme Court. It is the duty
of the judge so appoi nted to attend the sittings
of the Su p reme Court, in priority to other
duties of hi s/her office. While so Htte ndillg,

he /s he enjoys a ll the jurisd ict io n , powers
and pr ivi leges (a nd discharges the dut ies) of
a judge of the Supreme Co urt.
Retired Judge At any time, the chi ef justice
of In dia ca n reque st a retired judge of t he
Supreme Co urt or a retired j udge of a hi gh
court (who is dul y qualified for appo in tment
as a j udge of the Supreme Cou rt) to act as a
j udge of the Supre me Co urt for a temporary
period. He/ she can do so only with the previous con sent of the Presi dent and a lso of the
person to be so appo inted. Such a judge is
e ntitled to sll ch a ll owa nces as the Presi dent
may de term ine. He/ she will also e njoy all
the j u risdiction, powers and privi leges of
a judge of Supreme Cou rt. But, he / sh e will
not o th e rwise be deemed to be a judge of the
Supreme Co u rt.

t SEAT AND PROCEDURE
Seat of Supreme Court Th e Co n st itution
decla res Delhi as the scat of the Sup re me
Court. BUl, it also a uthorises the chief justice of Ind ia to a ppoint oth er place or places
'IS seat of the Supreme Court. He / she can
take deci sion ill this regard on ly with the
approva l of the President. Th is prov is iol1
is onl y optiona l a nd not co mpul so ry. Th is
me<lns that no court ca n g ive a ny direct ion
e ither to the Presi dent or to the Chi ef Justice
to appoint a ny other pla ce as a seat of the
Supreme Court.
Procedure of the Court The Supreme Co urt
can, wi th the approval of thc Presi dent , make
ru les for regulating gene ra ll y the practice and
procedure of the Co urt. The Constitution,,}
cases or refere n ces m ade by the President
und er Arti cle 143 are dccided by a Bench consisting of at least five judges. All oth er cases
are deci ded by si ngle judgcs and divi s ion
benches. Thcjudgements are delivered by the
open court. All j udgcments are by majority
vote but ifdiffer ing, then judges ca n give di sse nting judgemen ts o r opini o ns.

t

Supreme Court

INDEPENDENCE OF SUPREME
COURT

The Supreme Court ha s been assigned a very
signi ficant role in the Indi a n democratic
politica l system. It is a federal court, th e
highest co urt of appea l, the guarantor of
th e fundamental righ ts of th e citizens and
guardi an of th e Constitution. Therefore, its
in depende nce becomes very esse ntial for the
effect ive discharge of the duties assigned to
it. It should be free fro m the encroachments,
pressures a nd interferences of the executive
(council of ministers) and the Legislature
(Parlia m ent). It should be a llowed to do justice without fear or favour.
The Const itution has made the following
provisions to safeguard a nd e nsure the independent and impartial functioning of the
Supreme Court:

1. Mode of Appointment The judges of th e

\

'I

Supreme Court are a ppointed by the President
(which means the cabi n et) in co n sultation
with t he members of the judiciary itself (ie,
judges of the Supre me Co urt and th e hi gh
courts). This provision curta ils the absolute
d iscre tion of the executive a s well as ensures
that the judicial appointments are not based
on any political or pra ctical consideratio ns.
T h e judges of the
Supre m e Court are provid ed wit h th e Security of Te nure. They ca n be removed from
office by the President onl y in the mann er a nd on the grounds m ent ione d in the
Co n stitution. This means t ha t t hey do not
hold t h e ir office during the pleasure of the
Presi dent, though they are appointe d by
him / h e r. This is obvious from t he fact that
no j udge of the Sup reme Court has been
removed (or imp eached) so far.

2. Security of Tenure

The salaries, allowances, privileges, leave and pension of the
j udges of the Sup re m e Court are determin ed
from time to time by the Parliame nt . They

3. Fixed Service Conditions

~ 289

cannot be changed to t he ir disadvantage after
t he ir appo intm e nt excep t during a financial
e mergency. Thus, the conditio n s of service of
the judges of the Supreme Cou rt remain same
durin g their term of Office.

4. Expenses Charged on Consolidated Fund

Th e salaries, a llowa n ces and pen sions of the
judges and the staff as weIl as all th e administrative expe nses of the Supreme Court are
charged on t he Con so lidated Fund of India.
T hus, they are non-votab le by th e Pa rliament
(though they can be di scussed by it).

5. Conduct of Judges cannot be Discussed

Th e Co n stitution prohibits any di sc ussion
in Parliament or in a State Legislature with
respect to the co nduct of the judges of the
Supreme Court in the di sch arge of th e ir
duties, except when an impea chm e nt motion
is under con siderat io n of the Parliament.

6. Ban on Practice after Retirement The
retired judges of the Supreme Court are prohibited from pleading or acti ng in any Cou rt
or before any authority within the territory
of India. T hi s ensures tha t they do not favo ur
a nyone in the hope of future favo u r.

7. Power to Punish for its Contempt The

Suprem e Court ca n punish any person for
its contempt. Thus, its actio n s and dec isions
cannot be criticised and opposed by any body.
This power is vested in the Supreme Court to
maintain its a uthority, dignity and ho nou r.

8. Freedom to Appoint its Staff The Chief Jus-

tice of India can appoi nt officers and serva nts
of the Supreme Court without any interference
from the executive. He/she can a lso prescribe
the ir conditions of service.

9. Its Jurisdiction cannot be Curtailed The

Parliament is not authorised to curtail the jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme Court. The
Constitution has guaranteed to the Supre me
Court, jurisdiction of various kinds. However,
the Parl iame nt can extend the same.

290 ,(I Ind;on Polity
JURISDICTION AND POWERS
OF SUPREME COURT
The Co nstitution has co nferred a very exte ns ive juri sdi c tion and vast powe rs on the
Suprem e Court . It is not onl y a Federal Co urt
like the American Supreme Court but also a
fina l court of a ppeal like the British House
of Lords (the Upper House of the British Pa fliam e nt). It is a lso the fi nal inte rpreter and
guardian of th e Con stitution and guarantor
of th e fundam e ntal Tights of th e citizens. Further, it has advisory and supe rvisory powers.
T h e refore, All a di Kri shn as wam y Ayyar, a
me mber of the Drafting Co mmittee of the
Constituent Assembl y, rightl y remarked: "The
Supreme Court of India has morc powers
than any othe r Suprem e Coun in any part
of the world." The jurisdi ction <lnd powers of
the Supreme Court ca n be classified into the
following:
1. Original Juri sdiction.
2 . Writ Juri sdiction .
3. Appellate Juri sdi ction.
4. Advisory Jurisdi ction .
5 . A Court of Reco rd.
6. Power of Judicia l Review.
7. Con stitutional Inte rpretation
8 . Other Powers.

II IOriginal Jurisd iction
As a fed e ral court, the Supre me Co urt decides
the disputes between differe nt units of the
Indian Fed e ration. More el a borate ly, any
di spute:
(a) Between the Ce ntre a nd one or more
sta tes; or
(b) Between the Centre a nd any state or su1tes
on one side and one or m ore other states
o n the other s ide; or
(c) Be tween two or mo re states.
In the above federal di sputes, the Supreme
Court has exc lu sive orig in a l jurisdi c tion .
Ex.clusive mea n s, no other court ca n deci de
suc h disputes and original mean s, the powe r
to hea r such d isputes in the first instance, not
by way of a ppea l.

With regard to th e exclusive original jurisdiction of th e Supreme Co urt, two po ints
shou ld be noted . One, th e d isput e mu st
involve a question (whether of law or fact )
on whi ch th e existence or ex tent of a legal
right depe nds. Thus, the question s of politica l nature are excluded from it. 1\\'0, any
suit brought before the Supre me Court by a
private cit ize n a ga in st the Ce ntre or a state
ca nnot be e nte rtained under this.
Furthe r, this jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court does not extend to th e followin g:
(a) A dispute arising out of allY treaty, agreement, cove nant, e ngage ment, sana d or
other s imilar in strum e nt whi c h, having
bee n e nt ered into or executed before
the co mm e nce ment of th e con stitution,
continues in operation after such commen ce me nt, or whi ch prov ides that the
saidjurisciicti on sha ll not ex tend to such
a di spute.
I"sputes. 7
(b) Inte r-state fl"vcr water (I
(c) Matters re fe rre d to the Finan ce
Co mmi ss ion.
(d) Adjustment of certain ex penses and pe ns ions be tween the Centre an d the states.
In 1961, th e first su it, unde r the original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, wa s
brought by West Bengal against the Centrc. The State Govern ment c hallenged the
Co nst itutio nal val idity of the Coal Bearing
Area s (Acquisition and Development) Act,
J 957, pa ssed by the Parliament. However, the
Supreme Co urt di smissed the suit by upholding the val idity of the Act.

!I IWrit Jurisdiction
Th e Co nstitution ha s co nstituted the Supre me
Co urt as th e guarantor and de fe nder o f t he
fu ndamenta l rights of the c iti ze n s. The
Sup reme Co urt is e mpowered ro issue writs
'The Inter-Suite Ri ver Water Disputes Act of 1956 has
excl uded t he o riginal j uri sdiction of the Supreme
Court in dis putes between st.1 tes with respect to the
usc, distributi on or contro l of t he wa ter of inle rSLue river o r river va lley.

Supreme Court ~
including habeas corpus, mandamus, prohi·
bition, quo warranto and certiorari for the
enforcement of the fund a men tal ri ghts of an
aggri eved citi zen. In this regard, the Supreme
Court has original jurisd ict io n in the sen se
that an aggrieved citizen can directl y go to
the Supreme Court, not necessaril y by way
of a ppeal. However, the writ j uri sdiction of
the Supreme Court is not excl usive. The high

cou rts are also em powered to issue writs for
the enforcement of the Fundamental Righ ts,
It mean s, whe n the Fundamental Rights of a

citizen. are violated, the aggrieved party has
the option of moving either th e high court or
the Supreme Co urt directl y.
Therefore, the origin al jurisdiction of the
Supr.c me Court with regard to federal di sputes
is differen t from its original jurisdiction with
regard to disputes relating to fundamental
rights. In the first case, it is exclusive a nd in
the seco nd case, it is con current ,,,ith hi gh
co urts jurisdiction. Moreover, the parties
involved in the first case are units of the federation (Ce ntre and states) whil e the dispute
in the secon'd case is b etwee n a citi zen and
the Gov.ernment (Cen tral or state).
There is a lso a difference between the writ
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and that of
the high court . The Supreme Court can issue
writs only for the enforce ment of the Fu ndamental Rights and not for other purposes.
Th e high court, on th e oth er h and, ca n issue
writs n ot only for the en forcement of the fundamental rights but also for other purposes.
It means that th e writ jurisdiction of the
high court is wider than that of the Supreme
Court. But, the Parliament ca n confer on the
Su preme Court, the power to issue writs for
oth er purposes also.

IIIAppellate Jurisdiction
As mentioned earli er, the Supreme Court has
not only succeeded the Federal Court of Ind ia
but also replaced the British Privy Coun ci l
as the hi gh est court of a ppea l. The Suprem e
Court is primarily a court of app ea l and hears
a ppeals agai nst the judgements of th e Hi gh

291

courts. It enj oys a wide appe ll ate jurisdiction
which can be classified under four h ea ds:
(a) Appeals in consti tu tio n al matters.
(b) Appeals in civil matters.
(e) Appea ls in crimin al matte rs.
Cd) Appeals by spec ial leave.
(a) ConstitutIonal Matters In the co n stitutional cases, an appeal can b e made to the
Supreme Court against the judgement of a
high court if the high court certifi es that
the case involves a substanti al question of
law that require s the interpretat io n of the
Co n stitution. Based on the certificate, the
party in the case cart appeal to the Supreme
Court o n the ground that the qu estion h as
b ee n i"rongly ded ded .
(b) Civil Matters In civil cases, art appea l
li es to the Supreme Court from any j udgemen t
of a high court if th e high court certi fies (i) that the case involves a substanti al question of law of general importance; and
(ii) that the qu estio n n eeds to be decided by
th e Supreme Court.
Originally, on ly those civ il cases that
involved a sum of not less than 'f20,OOO cou ld
be a ppea led before the Supreme Co urt. But
thi s monetary limit was removed by th e 30th
Constitu tion al Amendment Act of 1972.
(c) Criminal Matter'S The Supreme Court hears
a ppea ls against the judgement in a criminal
proceeding of a high court if th e high court(i) has on a ppeaJ reversed an order of acquittal of a n accused person a nd senten ced
him / her to death i or
(ii) h as taken before itself a ny case fro m any
subord inate cou rt a nd conv icted the
accused person and sen ten ced him / her
to dea th; or
(iii) certifies that the case is a fit one for
appeal to the Supreme Court.
In the first hvo cases, an appeal lies to the
Supreme Court as a matter of right (ie, without
any certificate of the high court). But if the high
court has reversed the order of conviction and
has ordered the acquittal of the accused, there
is no right to appea l to the Supreme Court.

292

(! Indian Polity

III 1970, the Parliament h a d en larged
t he Crimina l Appellate Juri sdi c tion of the
Supre me Co urt. Accordi ngl y, an appeal lies
to the Supreme Court from th e judgem e nt of
iI high court if the hi gh court;
(i) has on appeal , reversed an order of acquittal of i1n acc used person a nd se nten ced
him / her to impri sonment for life or for
te n years; or
(ii) has takc n bcfore itselfany case from any
s ubordinate coun and convi cte d th e
a ccused person and senten ced him / he r
to impri sonment for li fe or for ten years.
(d) Appea l by Special Leave The Supre me
Court is authori sed to gra nt in its discretion
spcc ial kave to appeal fro m any judge me nt
in any ma tte r pa ssed by any court or t ribun a l
in the country (exce pt military tribunal a nd
court martial ) . T hi s provision contains the
four a spects as under:
(i) It is a discret io nary power and he nce,
cannot be claimed a s a matte r of right.
(ii) It can be granted in any judgeme n t
whether fi nal o r in te rl oc utO ry.
(iii) It nHly be related to any matter- co nstituti o na l, c ivil , c riminal , in come-tax,
labour, revenu e, advocalCs, etc.
(iv) It ca n be gramed against any court or tribunal and not necessar ily again st a high
court (of course, except a mi lit..1 ry court).
Thus, the scope of thi s prov ision is ve ry wide
and it vests the Supre me Co urt with a plenary
jurisdiction to hear a ppeills. On the exercise of
th is power, the Supreme Court itself held that
fbeing a n c"{ce ptiona l and overriding po\\re r, it
has to be exercised sparingly and with caution
a nd onl y in special extraordinary situations.
Beyond that it is not possible to fetter the c"{erc ise of this power by any set formul a or rul e'.

El lAdvisory Jurisdiction
T he Constitut io n (Art icle 143) a uthorises th e
President to seek the opinion of t he Supre me
Court in the two categories of matters:
(a) On any question of law or fa ct of publi c
importan ce whi ch ha s a ri se n o r whi c h
is l ikely to ari se.

(b) On any di spute a ri si ng o ut of any pre-

co n sti tuti o n treaty, agreement , covena n t, engageme n t, sanad or oth er
s im ilar in strument, whi c h is exc luded
from th e origina l jurisdi ction of Ih e
Suprem e Co urt.
In the first case, the Supre me Court may
tende r o r may re fuse to te nder its opini o n
to the Preside nt. But, in th e second case, th e
Supreme Court ' must' tender its opin ion to
the Pres ident. In both the C<l SCS, the opi nion expressed by the Supre me Court is o nl y
adviso ry a nd nOt a judici al pronoun cem e nt.
He nce, it is not bindin g on the Pres ide nt; hel
she may follo w or may not fo ll ow the opin ion.
However, it fa c ili tates the gove rnm ent to have
an authoritative lega l opinion on a matter to
be dec ided by it.
So fa r, the Pres id e nt has made fifteen referen ces to t he Supre me Co urt u nder its advi sory jurisdj ct io n (a lso known as con sultative
jurisdiction ). These are me ntion ed be low i n
(he c hronologi cal ord er.
1. De lhi Laws Ac t in J95 1
2 . Ke ra la Ed ucation Bill in 1958
3. Be rubar i Union in 1960
4. Sea Customs Act in 1963
5 . Keshav Singh 's case re lating to th e priv ileges of the Leg islature in 1964
6. Pres ident ial Election in 1974
7. Spec ial Co u rtS Bi ll in 1978
8. Jammu and Ka shmir Resett le ment ACI
in 1982
9. Cau ve ry Wate r Disputes Tribunal in 1992
10. Ra ma Janma Bhumi case in 1993
11. Co nsultation process to be adopted by t he
chi e f justice of India in 1998
] 2. Leg islative com pe te nce of the Ce ntre LInd
States on the subject of natural gas a nd
li que fied natural gas in 2001
13 . T he constitutional validity of th e Election
Comm iss io n 's dec ision o n deferrin g the
Guj i]fat Assembl y Elect io ns in 2002
14 . Punjab Ter m ination of Agreements Act
in 2004
15. 2G spectrum c.ase verdict and the mandatory au ctioning of natur.a l resources
across all sectors in 201 2

Supreme Court

IIIA Court of Record
As a Court of Record, the Supreme Court has
two powers:
(a) The judgements, proceedings and acts
of the Supreme Court are recorded for
perpetual memory and testimony. These
reco rds are admitted to be of evidentiary
value and cannot be questioned when
produced before any court. They are
recognised as legal precedents and legal
references.
(b) It has power to punish for contempt of itself.
In 1991, the Supreme Court has ruled that it
has power to punish for contempt not only
of itself but also of high courts, subordinate
courts and tribunals fun ctioning in the
entire country.
Contempt of Courts Act (1971) In 1961, the
government appointed a special committee
under the chairmanship of H.N. Sanyal, the
the n Additiona l Solicitor General of Indi a, to
examine th e law relati ng to the contempt of
courts. This committee subm itted its report in
1963. Based on the recommendations made by
the committee, the Contempt of Courts Act,
1971 was enacted by the Parliament.
Under the Act, the contempt of court may
be civil or criminal. The civil contempt mean s
wilfu l d isobedience to any judgement, order,
writ or other process of a court or wilful
breach of an undertaking give n to a court. The
crim inal contempt, on the other hand, means
the publication of any matter or doing an act
which -(i) scandalises or lowers the author·
ity of a court; or (ii) prej udices or interferes
with the due course of a judicia l proceeding;
or (iii) interferes or obstructs the administration of justice in any other man ner.
However, in nocent publication and distribution of matter, fair and accurate report of judicial proceedings and fair criticism of judicial
acts do not amount to contempt of court.
Under the Act, a contempt of court is pun·
ishable with simple impriso nment for a term
upto six mon ths or with fine upto ~2 , OOO or
with both.

~ 293

The Act a lso provides that no court shall
initiate any proceedings of co ntempt after
the expiry of one year from the date on
which the co ntempt is al1eged to have bee n
committed.
Furth er, th is Act is not applicable to contempt of Nyaya Panchayats or other village
courts which have been established for the
administration of justice.

II IPower of Judicial Review
Judicial review is the powe r of the Suprem e
Court to examine the constitutionali ty of
legislative enactm ents and executive orders
of both the Central and state governments.
On exa mination, if they are found to be violative of the Constitution (ultra.vires), they
ca n be declared as illegal, unconstitutiona l
and invalid (null and void) by the Supreme
Court. Consequently, they cannot be enforced
by the Government.

II IReview Jurisdiction
The Supreme Co urt has power to review any
judgement pronounced or order made by it.
A rev iew petition has to be fil ed within thirty
days from th e date of the judgemen t or order
sought to be reviewed. Also, the review peti·
tion should be submitted to the same judge or
ben ch that delivered the judgement or order.
Further, a review petition is a110wed on the
following grounds:
(1) Discovery of new and important matter
or evidence.
(ii) Mistake or error apparent on the fa ce of
the record.
(iii) Any other sufficient reason.
The court may either di sm iss the rev iew
pet itio n or direct notice to th e opposite
party. However, even after the dismissal of the
rev iew petition, the court ca n still reconsider
its fina l judgement or order by way of a curati ve petition on limited grounds like:
(i) Vi01ation of the principles of natural
justice.
(ii) 1b cure a gross miscarriage of justice.

294

P

Indian Polity

(i ii) 1b prevent abuse of the process of the

co urt .
( iv) Bias of the judge.

El lConstitutional Interpretation
The Supreme Court is th e ultimate interpreter
of the Constitution. It can give final version
to the spirit and co ntent of the provisions of
the constitution and the verb iage used in th e
co n st itution.
While interpreting the const itution , the
Supreme Court is guided by a number of
doctrines. In other words, the Supreme Court
applies various doctrines in interpreting the
constitution. The important doctr ines are mentioned below:
1. Doctrine of Seve rability
2. Doctrin e of Waiver
3. Doctrine of Eclipse
4. Doctrine of Thrritorial Nexus
5 . Doctrin e of Pith and Substance
6. Doctrine of Co lourabl e Legis lation
7. Doctrine of Impli ed Powers
8. Doctrine of In cidental and Ancillary
Powers
9. Doctrin e of Precedent
10. Doctrine of Occupied Field
11. Doctrine of Prospective Overruling
12. Doctrine of Harmonious Co nstructi on
13. Doctrine of Libera l Interpretation

aI

Other Powers

Besi des the above, the Supreme Court has
num ero us other powe rs:
(a) It dec ides the di sputes rega rdin g the
election of the President and the vicePresident. In this regard, it ha s the
original, exc1usive and final authority.

(b)

It enquires into the condu ct and behav-

io ur of the chairman and members of
the UPSC or SPSC or JSPSC on a re fere nce m ade by the Pres id ent. If it finds
them guilty of mi sbe haviou r, it ca n
recom m en d to th e Pres ident for their
r emova l. The advice ten dered by the
Sup rem e Co urt in thi s rega rd is binding
o n the President.
(c) It is authorised to withdraw the cases
pending before the high co urts and di spose them by itself. It ca n also transfer a
case or a ppeal pending b efore on e high
court to another high co urt.
(d) Its law is binding on all courts in India. Its
decree or order is enforceab le throughout the country. All a uthoriti es (civil and
judicial) in the country should act in a id
of the Supreme Court.
(e) It has power of judicial superintendence
and co ntrol over all the co urts a nd tribunal s functioning in the entire territory
of the cou ntry.
The Suprem e Court's jurisdiction a nd powers with respect to matters in the Union list
can b e enlarged by the Parliament. Furthe r,
its jurisdiction and powers with respect to
other matters ca n be e nlarged by a special
agreement of the Ce ntre and the states.

-l INDIAN AND AMERICAN
SUPREME COURTS COMPARED
There are differences in the jurisdiction and
powers of th e Suprem e Court of India and
that of the Supreme Court of USA. These a re
summarised in 'Table 26.1.

Sup ..me Cou"
Table 26.1

~ 295

Comparing Indian and American Supreme Courts

Indian Supreome Court

American Supreme Court

1. Its original jurisdiction is confined to federal cases.

1. Its original jurisdiction covers not only federal cases
but also cases relating to naval forces, maritime

activities, ambassadors. etc.
2. Its appellate Jurisdiction IS confined to constttuuonall

2. Its appellate jurisdiction covers constitutional, eMI

and criminal cases.

cases only.

3. It has a very wide discretion to grant special leave
to appeal in any matter against the judgement of
any court or tribunal (except military).
"

----

- -----:.;.~~

4. It has advisory jurisdiction.

3. It has no such plenary power.

---~---~.

4. It has no advisory jurisdiction.

5. Its scope of judicial review is limited.

5. Its scope of judicial review Is very wide.

6. It defends rights of the citizen according to the
'procedure established by law'_
- _ _ __

6. It defends rights of the citizen according to the 'due

process of law'.

7. Its jurisdiction and powers can be enlarged by
7. Its jurisdiction and powers are limited to that
Parliament.
Constitution
. _r _
_
_ _ _ conferred by the
___
'_ _
~_ .

8. It has power of Judicial superintendence and control
over state fllgh courts due to Integrated judicial

-_ ~

S. It has no such power due to double (or separated)
Judicial system.

system.

Table 26.2
51 No

Act (Year)

MaXimum Number of

Milxlmum Number of

Judges Fixed (Exc ludmg
Chief Justice of Indlil)

Judges Fixed (Includmg
Chief Justice of Ind,,))

1.

Article 124 of the Constitution

7

8

2.

Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Act. 1956

10

11

13

I.

3.

.5.

6.

"-

7.

....

Acts Relating to the Composition of the Supreme Court

Supreme Court (Number of Judges)
Amendment Act, 1960
Supreme Court (Number of Judges)
Amendment Act, 1977

17

Supreme Court (Number of Judges)
Amendment Act, 1986

25

..-..-.._-.

Supreme Court (Number of Judges)
Amendment Act, 2008
Supreme Court (Number of Judges)
Amendment Act. 2019

,

::l

-

18

26

-----30

31

33

3.

Note: Article 124(1) of the Constitution reads as follows: -There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a
Chief Justice of India and, until Parliament by law prescribes a larger number. of not more than seven other judges

R
•

296

'ndian Polity

Tab le 26.3

Articles Related to Supre me Court at a Glance

Article No.

Subject-matter

124.

Establishment and Constitution of Supreme Court

124A.

National Judicial Appointments Commlsslo n

12 48.

Functions of Commission

124C.

Power of Parliament to make law

125.

Salaries, etc., of Judges

126.

Appointment of acting Chief Justice

127.

Appointment of ad hoc Judges

128.

Attendance of retired Judges at sittings of the Supreme Court

129.

Supreme Court to be a court of record

130.

Seat of Supreme Court

131 .

Original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court

131 A.

Exclusive Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in regard to questions as to constitutional validity of
Central Laws (Repealed)

132.

Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in appeals from High Courts in certain cases

133.

Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in appeals from High Courts in regard to civil matters

134.

Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in regard to criminal matters

134A.

Certificate for appeal to the Supreme Court

135.

Jurisdiction and powers of the Federal Court under existing law to be exercisable by the Supreme Court

136.

Specla/leave to appeal by the Supreme Court

137.

Review of judgments or orders by the Supreme Court

138.

Enlargement of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court

139.

Conferment on the Supreme Court of powers to issue certain writs

139A.

Transfer of certain cases

140.

Ancillary powers of Supreme Court

141.

Law declared by Supreme Court to be binding on all courts

142.

Enforcement of decrees and orders of Supreme Court and orders as to discovery. etc.

143.

Power of President to consult Supreme Court

144.

Civil and judicial authoritles to act in aid of the Supreme Court

144A.

Special provisions as to disposal of questions relating to constitutional validity of laws (Repealed)

145.

Rules of court, etc.

146.

Officers and servants and the expenses of the Supreme Court

147.

Interpretation

,

In a number of cases, the Supreme Court
has pointed out t he sign ifica nce of th e power
of judicial review in our country. Som e of t he
observations made by it, in thi s regard, a rc
give n be low:
"In India it is the Co n stitu tion that is
suprem e an d that a statute law to be va lid,
must be in co nformity with the constitutional
requirements and it is for the judicia ry to
dec ide wheth er any enactment is co nstitutional or n ot~.z
"Our co nstituti o n conta in s ex press provisions for judic ial review of leg islation as to
its co nformi ty with the co nstitu tio n. Th is is
cspecia1Jy t rue as regards th e Fundamental
Rights, to which th e court has bee n assig ned
t he role of se ntin e l on the qu i vive".3
"As long as some Fundament.:1.1 Rights exist
and are a part of the Constitutio n, the power
of judicial review has also to be exe rcised with
a view to see that the guaran tees afforded by
these Rights are not cont ravened"."
"The Co nstitution is suprem e lex, th e permane nt law of the land, and there is no branch
of governm e nt above it. Every organ of governme nt, be it the executive or the legislatu re or
the judiciary, derives its au tho rity fro m the
Constitutio n a nd it has to act within the limi ts
of its auth ority. No one however highl y pla ced
a nd no authority howsoever lofty, ca n claim
that it sha ll be the sole judge of the extent of
its power under the Consti tution o r whether
its action is within the confin es of such powcr
laid down by the constitution. This Court is the
ultimate interpreter of the Constitution a nd to
this Court is assigned the del icate t.1.sk of determining what is the power conferred on each
branch of governm e nt, whethe r it is limited,
and if so, what are the limits and whether any
action of that branch tra nsgresses such lim itsO: s
2Chicf Justice Kania in A.K. Capo /an vs. State of
Madras ( 1950).

lChief Justice Patanja li ShaSlri in State of Madras vs.
v.G. Row (1952 ).
"'Justice Kh,1nna in Kesauananda Bharati vs. State of
Kerala ( 1973) .
sJustice Bhagwati in State of Riljasf/wlI vs. Ulliotl of
India ( 1917) .

~ It is the funct ion of the Judges, may their

duty, to pronoun ce upon t he va lidi ty of laws.
If cou rts are tota ll y depri ved of that power, th e
Funda me nta l Rights co nferred on the people
wilJ be co m e a mere a do rnm ent beca u se
rights without remedies are as writ in water.
A contro ll ed Constitu tio n will t hen become
unco ntro ll ed".6
"Th e judges of the Supre me Court have
bec n e ntrusted with t he task of uph olding
the Co nst itu tio n and to this e nd , ha ve been
conferred the power to interpret it. It is t hey
who have to ensure t hat the ba lance of power
envisaged by t he Constitutio n is maintained
and t hat the legis lature and t he executi ve
do not, in the disc ha rge of the ir fun ct ions,
transgress co nstitutional limitations,,7.
"'The foun ding fathers very wisely, therefore,
incorporated in the Co nstitution itse lf the
provisions of judicial review so as to ma inta in
the ba lance of fede rali sm, to protect t he Fundamenta l Rights a nd Fundamental Freedoms
gua ranteed to the c iti ze ns a nd to afford a
usefu l weapon for availability, ava ilm e nt and
e njoyme nt of equality, liberty and Fundam enta l Freedoms a nd to hel p to c reatc a healthy
nat io na lism . The function of judicial rev iew
is a part of t he co nstitutio na l inte rpretation
itself. It adju sts the Co nsti tution to meet new
conditions and needs of the tim e".8

j

CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

T hou gh t h e phrase 'Judi c ial Review ' has
nowh ere been used in the Const.ituti o n, the
provisions of severa l Articl es exp li citly co nfer
the p ower of judicial review on the Su pre me
Cou rt an d t he I-ligh Courts. These provisions
are exp lained below:
1. Article 13 decla res that a l1l aws that are
inco nsistent with o r in de rogation of the
"Chief Justice Chandrachud in Minerva Mi lls vs.
Un ion of Ind ia ( 1980).

' Chief Justice Ahmad i in L. C1wtldm Kumar vs.

Un iOIl of India (1997J.
BJ ustice Ramaswam i in S.S. Bola vs. B.D. Sll(1rma
( 1997).

Judicial Review

Fundamental Rights shaH be nuH and
void.
2. Article 32 guarantees the right to move
the Supreme Court for the enforcement
of the Fundamental Rights and empowers
the Supreme Court to issue directions or
orders or writs for that purpose.
3 . Article 131 provides for the original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in centrestate and inter-state disputes.
4 . Article 132 provides for the appellate
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in
constitutional cases.
5 . Article 133 provides for the appellate
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in
civil cases.
6 . Article 134 provides for the appellate
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in
criminal cases.
7. Article 134-A deals with the certificate for
appeal to the Supreme Court from the
High Cou rts. 9
8 . Article 135 empowers the Supreme Court
to exercise the jurisdiction and powers
of the Federal Court under any preconstitution law.
9. Article 136 authorises the Supreme Court
to grant special leave to appeal from
any court or tribunal (except military
tribunal and court martial).
10. Article 143 authorises the President to
seek the opinion of the Supreme Court
on any question of law or fact and on
any pre-constitution legal matters.
11 . Article 226 empowers the High Courts to
issue directions or orders or writs for the
enforcement of the Fundamental Rights
and for any other purpose.
12 . Article 227 vests in the High Courts the
power of superintendence over all courts
and tribunals within their respective
territorial jurisdictions (except military
courts or tribunals).
13. Article 245 deals with the territorial
extent of laws made by Parliament and
by the Legislatures of States.
~is provision was added by the 44th Constitutional
Amendment Act of 1978.

~, 299

14. Article 246 deals with the subject matter
of laws made by Parliament and by the
Legislatures of States (Le., Union List,
State List and Concurrent List).
15. Articles 251 and 254 provide that in case
of a conflict between the central law and
state law, the central law prevails over
the state law and the state law shall be
void.
16. Article 372 deals with the continuance in
force of the pre-constitution laws.

t SCOPE OF JUDICIAL REVIEW
The constitutional validity of a legislative
enactment or an executive order can be challenged in the Supreme Court or in the High
Courts on the following three grounds.
(a) it infringes the Fundamental Rights
(Part Ill),
(b) it is outside the competence of the
authority which has framed it, and
(e) it is repugnant to the constitutional
provisions.
From the above, it is clear that the scope
of judicial review in India is narrower than
what exists in the USA, though the American
Constitution does not explicitly mention the
concept of judicial review in any of its provisions. This is because, the American Constitution provides for 'due process of law' against
that of 'procedure established by law' which
is contained in the Indian Constitution. The
difference between the two is: "The due process
of law gives wide scope to the Supreme Court
to grant protection to the rights of its citizens.
It can declare laws violative of these rights
void not only on substantive grounds of being
unlawful, but also on procedural grounds of
being unreasonable. OUf Supreme Court, while
determining the constitutionality of a Jaw,
however examines only the substantive question i.e., whether the law is within the powers
of the authority concerned or not. It is not
expected to go into the question of its reasonableness, suitability or policy implications". iO
IOSubhash C. Kashyap, Our Constitution, National
Book Tcust, Third Edition, 2001, p. 232.

300 ,~ Indian Polity
The exerci se of wide power of judici al
review by the Amer ican Supre me Court
in the name of 'd ue proce ss of law' clause
has mad e the cr i tics to descr ibe it as a
'third c hamb er' of the Legisl ature, a su perlegisla ture, the arb iter of socia l policy an d
so o n. T hi s Amer ica n princi ple of judici<t!
supre nulcy is a lso recog n ised ill our co nstitution al sys tem, but to i:I limite d extent . No r
do we fu lly fo ll ow the Britis h Prin cipl e of
parlia m e ntary supre macy. T here arc many
limita tions on t he sovere ignty of P,ulia ment
in our co un try, li ke the writte n chara cter of
the Const itutio n, the fede ra li sm with divis ion of powers, the Funda m e ntal Rights and
the judici al review. In effect , what exists
in India is a syn thesis of bo th, that is, the
Amcri c.an princ iple of judici a l supre macy
and the Britis h princ ip le of parlia menta ry
supre macy.

JUDICIAL REVIEW OF
THE NINT H SCHEDULE
Art icle 3-1B s.aves the acts and regula tion s
includ ed in the Ninth Sched u lc from bei ng
challe nged a nd i nva lidate d on the gro un d
of co ntrave ntion of any of the Funda me nta l Rights. Articl e 31B alo ng with the Ninth
Sched ule was added by the 1st Constitutio na l
Amen dmen t Act of 195 1.
Origin ally ( in 1951), the Ninth Sched ule
conta in ed o nl y 13 acts a nd regula tion s but at
11
prese nt the ir numb er is 282. Of these, th e
acts and reg ulatio ns of the state legisla ture
dea l with land reform s and abolit io n of the
za minda ri syste m a nd that of the Parlia ment
deal with oth er matte rs.
Howe ver, in the Ke savlIll lillda Blwra ti
case l2 (1973 ), the Supre me Co urt rules that
the acts a nd reg ul at ion s that a re includ ed
JlThough the last entry is num bered 284, the actual
total numbe r is 282. This is bec.1usc, the three
entries (87, 92 ilnd 130) bave been deleted and o ne
entry is numhe red as 257A.
I"l KcslIvw llIm{a B//(Imt i vs. Stflle of Kcm/a ( 1973).

in the Ninth Sched ule are open to challe nge
011 the gro unds of being violat ive of the ba sic
struct ure of the consti tu tion. This was later
13
clarifi ed by the cou rt in the WCI1IIl I/l Rao case
( 1980) where in it he ld th at the vario us acts
an d regu lat io ns includ ed in the Nin th Sched ule afte r 24 Apr il , 1973 (date of j udgem ent in
the KesavCll1<1nda Bhara ti case) are va lid only
if they do not damag e th e bas ic stru cture of
the co nst itutio n .
l
Again , in the 1.R. CoelllD case " (2007) , the
Su preme Co urt reaffi rmed th e a bove vicw.
In thi s case, the co urt ruled that there cou ld
not be any blank et im munit y from judic ia l
rev iew of the laws incl ud ed in the Nint h
Sched ul e. It held that j ud icia l review is a
'basic featur c' of the co nstitu tion and it cou ld
not be taken away puttin g a law un de r the
Ninth Sched u le. It said that the laws placed
under the Ninth Schcd ul e after 24 Apri l, 1973,
a rc opcn to challe nge in co urt if they violat ed
funda me n t<ll rights gUC:lranteed under Articl es
] 4, IS, 19 and 21 or the basic stru cture of the
co nstitu ti on.
While del iveri ng th e above judge ment, the
Supre me Co urt made the fo ll owing co nclus io ns:
1. A law that abrog ates or abridg es rights
gua rantee d by Part III of the Const itution
may violat e the basic struct ure doctri ne,
or it may not. I f forme r is the co nsequenc e of Jaw, wheth er by an ame ndmen t of a ny Art icle of Part III or by a n
insert ion in the Ni nth Sched ule, such
law will have to be in valida ted in the
exerci se of judici al review power of the
Court . The const it ut io nal valid ity of
the Ni nth Sched ul e laws on the tou chstone of basic struct ure doctri n e can be
adj udged by apply in g the direct impac t
and effect test, i.e., rights test, wh ic h
means the fonn of an amen dme nt is not
the rel evant factor, but the conse q uence
I3WlIIIW II Roo vs. v" jall of India (1980).
14

1.1<. CoclllQ VS. SlafC of'11:llll;1 Nadll (2007).

jud/dol Review

there of would b e the deter minat ive
factor.
2. The major ity judge ment in the Kesavanand
Bhara ti Case read with Indira Gandh i
easelS requir es the validi ty of each new
consti tution al Amen dmen t to be judge d
on its own merits . The actual effect and
impac t of the law on the rights guara nteed under Part 111 has to be taken into
accou nt for determ ining wheth er or not
it destro ys basic struct ure. The impac t
test would determ ine the validi ty of the
challe nge.
3. All amen dmen ts to the Const itutio n
made on or after 24th April, 1973 by
which the Ninth Sched ule is amen ded
by inclus ion of variou s laws therei n
shaH have to be tested on the touch stone
of the basic or essen tial featur es of the
Const itutio n as reflec ted in Articl e 21
read with Articl es 14 and 19 and the
princi ples under lying them. 1b put it
differ ently, even thoug h an act 'i s put in
the Ninth Sched ule by a Const itutio nal
Amen dmen t, its provi sions would' be
open to attack on the groun d that they
destro y or damag e the basic struct ure if
the Funda menta l Right or rights taken
away or abrog ated pertai ns or pertai n
to the basic struct ure.
4. Justif icatio n for confe rring protec tion,
not blank et prote ction, on the laws
inclu ded in the Ninth Sched ule by
Const itutio nal Amen dmen ts shall be a
matte r of consf itutio nal adjud icatio n
by exami ning the nature and exten t of
infrac tion of a Funda menta l Right by
a statute , sough t to be const itutio nally
protec ted, and on the touch stone of the
basic struct ure doctri ne as reflec ted in
Articl e 21 read with Articl es 14 and 19
by applic ation of the "right s test" and
the "essen ce of the right" test taking the
synop tic view of the article s in Part III
15rndira Nehru Gandh i vs. Ro.j Narain (1975).

~ 301

as held in the Indira Gandh i Case l6 •
Apply ing the above test to the Ninth
Sched ule laws, if the infrac tion affect s
the basic struct ure, then such a law
or laws will not get the protec tion of
the Ninth Sched ule. When the triang le
of Articl e 21 read with Articl e 14 and
Articl e 19 is sough t to be elimin ated not
only the "essen ce of the right~ test but
also the "right s test" has to apply. There
is also a differ ence betwe en the "right s
test" and the "essen ce of the right" test.
Both form part of applic ation of the
basic struct ure doctri ne. When in a controlle d const itutio n confe rring limite d
power of amen dmen t, an entire chapter is made in applic able, the "essen ce
of the right" test as applie d in Nagaraj
case 17 will have no applic ability . In such
a situat ion, to judge the validi ty of the
law, it is the "right s test" which is more
appro priate.
5. If the validi ty of any Ninth Sched ule law
has alread y been uphel d by this Court ,
it would not be open to challe nge such
law again on the princi ples declar ed by
this judge ment. However, if a law held
to be violat ive of any rights in Part III is
subse quent ly incorp orated in the Ninth
Sched ule after 24th April, 1973, such a
violat ion / infrac tion shall be open to
challe nge on the groun d that it destroys
or damag es the basic struct ure as indicated in Articl e 21 read with Articl es 14
and 19 and the princi ples under lying
them.
6. Action taken and transa ctions finaliz ed as
a result of the impug ned Acts shall not
be open to challe nge.
The numb er of acts and regula tions indud ed
in the Ninth Schedule before and after April 24,
1973 are menti oned in Thble 27.1.

16Ibid.
11M. Nagara j vs. Union of India (2006).

•

302

P

Indian Polity

Table 27.1 Number of Acts and Regulations Included In the Ninth Schedule
Serial Number

Amendment Number (Year)

Number of Acts and Regulations
Includ ed in the Ninth Schedule

I. Included Before April 24, 1973

1.

First Amendment (1951)

13 (110 13)

2.

Fourth Amendment (1955)

7(14\020)

3.

Seventh Amendment (1964)

44 (211064)

4.

Twenty-Ninth Amendment (1972)

2 (65 to 66)

II. Includod After AprIl 24. 1173

5.

Thlrty·Fourth Amendment (1974)

20 (67 to 86)

6.

ThIrty.Nlnth Amendment (1 975)

38 (8710 124)

7.

Fortieth Amendment (1976)

64 (125 to 188)

8.

Fony-Seven1h Amendment (1984)

14 (189 10 202)

9.

Sixty-Sixth Amendment (1990)

55 (203 to 257)

10.

Seventy-Sheth Amendment 11994)

1 (257A)

11 .

Seventy-Eighth Amendment (1995)

27 (258 to 284)

Not e: Entries 87, 92 and 130 have been om itted by the Forty-Fo urth Ame nd ment (1978).

Scan the QR Code to access the conceptual video o n Judicial Review
and Activism and o ther importan t topics on EDGE

CHAPTER

28

he conce pt of judici al activi sm originated and devel oped in the USA.
This term was first coine d in 1947 by
Arthu r Schle singer Jr., an Amer ican histor ian
and educa tor,l
In India , the doctri ne of judici al activi sm
was introd uced in the mid-1970s. Justic e V.R.
Krish na Iyer, Justic e P.N. Bhagw ati, Justic e
O. Chinn appa Reddy and Justic e D.A. Desai
laid the found ations of judici al activi sm in
the count ry.

T

j

MEA NING OF JUDICIAL
ACTIVISM

Judici al activi sm denot es the proact ive role
played by the judici ary in the protec tion of
the rights of citize ns and in the promo tion of
justice in the society. In other words, it implie s
the assert ive role played by the judici ary to
force the other two organ s of the gover nmen t
(legis lature and execu tive) to discha rge their
consti tution al duties.
Judici al activi sm is also know n as "judic ial
dynam ism". It is the antith esis of "j udicia l
restra int", which mean s the self-c ontrol exercised by the judici ary.
Judici al activi sm is define d in the foHowing way:
1. "Judic ial activi sm is a way of exerci sing
judici al power that motiv ates judge s to
depar t from norma lly practi sed strict
adher ence to judici al preced ent in favour
of progre ssive and new social polici es. It
is comm only marke d by decisi on callin g
IHis article entitle d as ~The Supreme Court: 1947" was
publis hed in the Fortun e magaz ine.

...

Judicial Activism

for social engin eering , and occas ionall y
these decisi ons repres ent intrus ion in the
legisla tive and executive matters". 2
2. "Judic ial activis m is the practi ce in the
judici ary of protec ting or expan ding individual rights throug h decisions that depart
from established preced ent, or are independe nt of, or in oppos ition to supposed
consti tution al or legisla tion intent~3
3. "Judic ial activi sm can be define d as
the proces s of law-m aking by judges . It
mean s an active interp retatio n of existing legisl ation by a judge, made with a
view to enhan ce the utility of that legislation for social better ment. Judici al activism is differ ent from judici al pessim ism
which mean s interp retatio n of existi ng
provis ions of law, witho ut an attem pt to
enhan ce its b enefic ial aspects".3a
4. "Judic ial activi sm is a philos ophy of judicia} decisi on-ma king where by judge s
allow their perso nal views about public
policy, amon g other factor s, to guide
their decisi ons".3b
5. "Judic ial activis m is a proced ure to evolve
new princ iples, conce pts, maxim s,
formu lae and relief to do justic e or to
expan d the stand ing of the litigan t and
open the door of courts for needy or to
entert ain litiga tion affect ing the entire
societ y or a sectio n of it"?c
2Black 's Law Diction ary.

3Me rriam Webster's Dictio nary of Law.

laVG. Palishikar, Judicia l Activism, AIR 1998, Journa l
volume 8, p. 201.
3b B lack's Law Diction ary.
3cp.B. Sawant, Judicia l Indepe ndence - Myth and Reality, (Pone: Board of Extra Mural Studies), 1987, p. 70.

304 ,r;!lndian Polity
~ ASPECTS OF JUDICIAL ACTIVISM
There are two major aspects of judicial activism followed by the Indian Judiciary:3d
( i) The first co mes in the form of various
directio ns issued by the courts to the
government a uthorities for protecting
the rights of citizens a nd fulfi lment of
a course of public in terest. The cases
Public Interes t Litigation (P IL) fall
under this aspect of judicial activism.
(ii) The seco nd major aspect of judicial activism in India is the field of interpretation
of fundamental rights, particu larly the
right to equa li ty (A rticle 14), the right
to freedom (Article 19) and the right to
life and personal liberty (A rticle 21).
The courts have expanded the scope
of these rights in their discretion and
interpretation of the constitution.

JUDICIAL REVIEW AND JUDICIAL
ACTIVISM
The concepts of judicia l review and judicial
activism are closel y related to each other.
But, there is a difference between them. The
following points bring out this difference:
1. Since about the mid-20th century, a version of judicial review has acquired the
nick-name of judicial activism, especially
in the USA. In India, the participants in
the debate mix up judicial activism with
judicial review. The former is that form
of latter in which judges participate in
law-making policies, i.e., not only they
uphold or invalidate laws in terms of
constitutional provisions, but also exercise
their policy preferences in doing so.Je
2 . The concept of judicial review is the
interpretation of the law in the light of
C. Aggarwal, Judicial Activism in India ,
Chapter 12 in Judicial Activism in India: A Festschrift in honour of Justice V.R. Krishna Iyer,
Ed ited by Lokendra Malik, Universal Law Publishing Co., First Edition, 2013, p. 125.
3e V.N. Shukla and Mahendra Pal Singh, Co nstitution of India, Eastern Book Compa ny, Thirteenth
Edition, 2017, p. A-51.
3<1 Adish

con sti tutional parameters but judicial
act ivism is mou ldi ng the law to suit the
cha nging social and economic sce nario
to make the ideals enshrined in the
Jf
co nstitution meaningful and rea1.
3. The term "judicial activism" came into
curren cy so me time in the twentieth
century to describe the act of judicial
legi slation i.e., judges making positive
law. However, there is no sta ndard definition of the term "judicial activism~.
As a whole it ca n be sa id that judicial
activism stresses the importance of judicia l review and a powerful judiciary in
the protection and promotion of certain
co re rights. 3g
4. The expan ded co nce pt of locus sta ndi in
connection with PIL, by judicial interpretation from time-to-time, has expanded
the jurisdictional limits of the co urts
exercising judicial review. This expanded
role has been given the title of Ujudicial
activism" by those who are critical of this
expa nded role of the judiciary.Jh
5. Judicial activism, as regards constitutional cases, falls under the rubric
of what is commonly called judicial
review, and at the broadest leve l, it is
any occasion where a court intervenes
and strikes down a piece of duly enacted
legislation. Ji
Jf Or. G. Rajasekar, Philosophy of Judicial Activism

and its Role in the Growth of Environmenta l Jurisprudence, Chapter 5, Part II , in Judiciary in India:
Constitutiona l Perspectives, Edited by G. Monoher
Rao, Dr. G.B. Reddy and V. Geeta Rao, Asia Law
House, Hydcrabad, First Edition, 2009, p. 180.
Jg Or. Vishal Guleria, Judicial Activism: A Ray of
Hope for the Marginalised Masses, Chapter 22 in
Judicial Activism in India: A Festschrift in honour
of Justice V.R. Krish na tyer, Edited by Lokendra
Malik, Universal Law Publishing co., First Edition,
2013, pp. 292-293.
JhJustice A.S. Anand, Judicial Review.Judicial ActivismNeed for Caution, Chapter t in Judicial Activism in
India: A Festschrift in honour of Justice V.R Krishna
lyel; Edited by l..okendm Malik, Universal Law Publishing Co., First Edition, 2013, p. 7.
JiR.'lbindra Kr. Pathak, Judicial Process, First Edition,
2019, Thomson Reuters, p. 259.

jud;daIActiv;sm

JUSTIFICATION OF JUDICIAL
ACTIVISM

7·

-

According to Dr. B.L. Wadehra, the reasons for
judicial activism are as follows:"
(i) There is n ea r collapse of the responsible government, when th e Legisla ture
and Executive fail to discharge their
respe c tive fun c tions . This result s
in erosion of the co nfide n ce in the
Con stitution and demo cra cy amongst
the citizens.
(ii) The citizens of the country look up to
the judiciary for the protection of their
rights and freedoms. This leads to trem endous pressure on judiciary to step
in aid for the suffering m asses.
(iii) Judicial Enthusiasm, that is, the judges
like to participate in the social reforms
that take place in the changing times. It
encourages the Public Interest Litigation
and libera lises the principle of 'Locus
Standi'.
(iv) Legislative Vacuum, that is, there may
be certa in areas, which have not been
legislated upon. It is therefore, upon the
court to indulge in judicial legislation
and to m eet the changing social n eeds.
(v) The Constitution ofIndia has itself adopted
certain provisions, which gives judiciary
enough scope to legislate or to play an
active role.
Similarly, Subhash Kashyap observes that
certain even tualities may be con ceived when
the judiciary may have to overstep its normal
jurisdiction and intervene in areas otherwise
falling within the doma in of the legislature
and the executive: 5
(i) When the legislature fails to djscharge its
responsibili ties.
(ii) In case of a 'hung' legislature when the
government it provides is weak, inse·
cure and busy only in the struggle for
survival and, therefore, unable to take
4 0r. B.L. Wadehra, Public lllterest Litigation: A Han d-

book, Second Edition, 2009, Univel"Sal Law Publishing Co., pp. 161-162.
5Subhash C. Kashyap, -Judiciary Legislature Interface", in Politics India, New Delhi, April 1997, p. 22.

~ 305

any decision which displeases any caste,
co mmunity, or other group.
(iii) Those in power may be afraid of taking
h onest and hard decisions for fear of
lOSing power and, for that reason , may
have public issues referred to co urts as
issues oflaw in order to mark time and
delay decisions or to pass on the odium
of strong decision.making to the courts.
(iv) Where the legislature and the executive fail to protect the basic rights of
citizens, like the right to live a decent
life, healthy surroundings, or to provide
honest, efficient and just system of laws
and administration.
(v) Where the court of law is misused ty a
strong authoritarian parliamentary party
government for ulterior motives, as was
sought to be done during the emergency
aberration.
(vi) Sometim es, the courts themselves knowingly or unknowingl y becom e victim s
of human, all too human, weakn esses of
craze for populism, publicity, playing to
th e media and hogging the h eadlines.

ACTIVATORS OF JUDICIAL
ACTIVISM
Upendra Baxi, an eminent jurist, has delineated
the following typology of social/human rights
activists who activated judicial activism 6;
1. Civil Rights Activists: These groups primaril y focus on civiJ and politica l rights
issues.
2. People Rights Activists: These groups
focus on social and economi c rights
within the contexts of state repression
of people's movements.
3 . Consumer Rights Groups: These form ations raise issues of co nsum er rights
6 Upendra Baxi, '"The Avatan of India n Judicial Activ-

ism: Explorations in the Geographies offin] Justice~
in S.K. Verma and Kusum (Ed.), Fifty Years of the
Supreme Court of India - Its Grasp and Reach, Indian
Law Institute a nd Oxford Univel"Sity Press, 2000,
pp . 173- 175.

306 ,~ Indian Polity
within the framework of accou ntab ility
of t he po lity and the economy.
4. Bonded Labour Gro ups : These groups
ask for j udicial activism is notilillg short
of ann ih ilation of wage slavery in India.
5. Citi ze n s for Environm en tal Action:
T hese groups activate an activist judic iary to combat increas ing environmental degrada tion and pollution.
6. Citizen Gro ups against Lnrge Irrigatio n
Proj ects: These activ ist formation s ask
the Indi a n judiciary t he impossible for
any judiciary in the world, namely,
cease to and d es ist from order in g
against mega irrigation projects.
7. Righ ts of Child Gro ups: These groups
focus on child labour, the right to literacy,
juvenil es in c ustod ia l in st itutions Hnd
rights of children born to sex: wo rkers.
8. Cu s tod ia l Rights Groups: These gro ups
include social action by prisoners' rig hts
groups, women u nder state 'protective'
custody an d persons u nder preventive
detention.
9. Poverty Rights Groups: These groups
litigate issues concerning draught and
famine relief and urban impoveri shed.
10. lndige nou s Peopl e's Ri ghts Groups:
These groups agitate for iss ues of forest
dwellers, citizens of t he Fifth and Sixth
Schedules of the In dian Constitution
a nd identity rights.
11. Wom en's Rights Groups: These grou ps
agitate for issues of gender equa l ity,
gender-based viol e nce a nd harassment,
rape a n d dowry mu rders.
12 . Bar-based Groups! These associations
agitate for issues concerning autonomy and accountab ili ty of the Indi an
judicia ry.
] 3 . Media Autonomy Groups: Th ese gro ups
focus on t he a utonomy and accoun tab ility ofthe press and in strum e n ts of mass
media own ed by th e Sta te.
14. Assorted Lawyer-Based Groups: T his category includes th e criti ca ll y influential
lawyers' groups wh ic h agitate for va ri ous
causes.

]5. Assorted Individu a l Petitioners: T hi s
category includes free lance activ ist
ind ividuals.

APPREHENSIONS OF JUDICIAL
ACTIVISM
The emi nent jurist, Upe ndra Baxi, prese n ted
a typol ogy of fears which are generated by
judicial activis m . He observes: "The facts
entai l invocation of a wide ra nge of fears. The
in vocation is designed to bring into a nervous
rationality a mong Ind ia's most co nscientious
justices ~. He described the fo ll owing types of
fears 7 :
1. Ideolo l,rlcaJ fears: (Are they usurping
powers of the leg islature, the execut ive
or of other a uton omo us institu tions in
a c ivil soc iety?)
2. Epistc mi c fears: (Do they have eno ugh
kn owledge in econom ic matters of a
Manmohan Singh, in scien tifi c matters
of t he Czars of the atom ic energy estab~
lishlll ent, th e captains of t he Council of
Scientific and Indu strial Research, and
so on?)
3 . Management fea rs: (Are they doing justice by adding this kind of litiga tion
work load to a situation of staggering
growth of arrea rs?)
4 . Lebrltimation fears: (Are not they causing
depletion of [heir sy mboli c and instrum e ntal a u thor i ty by pa ss ing orders
in public interest litigation which the
executi ve may bypass or ignore? Would
not t he peop1e's faith in judic ia ry, a
democra ti c recourse, be thus eroded?)
5. Democratic fears: (ls a profusion of publi c irUerest liti gation nurturing democracy or depleting its potentia l for the
future?)
6. Biographic fears: (What would be my
place in national affairs after supera nnuation if I overdo this kind of litigation?)
7Upe n dra Baxi, ~Judicial Activism: Legal Education

and Research in Globalising Indi .. ~ ill Mail/strealll,
New Delh i, 24 February, 1996, p. 16.

Judicial Activism

JUDICIAL ACTIVISM VS.
JUDICIAL RESTRAINT
Meaning of Judicial Restraint
Judicial activism and judicial restraint are the
two alternative judicial philosophies in the
United States. Those who subscribe to judicial
restraint contend that the role of judges should
be scrupulously limited; their job is merely to
say what the law is, leaving the business of1aw~
making where it properly belongs, that is, with
the legislators and the executives. Under no
circumstances, moreover, should judges allow
their personal political values and policy agendas to colour their judicial opinions. This view
holds that the 'original intent' of the authors of
the constitution and its amendments is knowable, and must guide the courts.8

Assumptions of Judicial Restraint

l

In the USA, the doctrine of judicial restraint
is based on the following six assumptions9 :
1. The Court is basically undemocratic
because it is non-elective and presumably non-responsive to the popular will.
Because of its alleged oligarchic composition the court should defer wherever possible to the 'more' democratic
branches of government.
2. The questionable origins of the great
power of judicial review, a power not
specifically granted by the Constitution,
3 . The doctrine of separation of powers.
4. The concept of federalism, dividing pOweIS
between the nation and the states requires
of the Court deference toward the action of
state governments and officials.
S . The non-ideological but pragmatic
assumption that since the Court is
dependent on the Congress for its
81a in McLean and Alistair McMillan, Oxford Concise
Dictionary of Politics, First Indian Edition, 2004,
p.284.
9 Joe l B. Grossman and Richard S. Wells (ed), Constitutional Law and Judicial Policy Making, 1972,
pp.56-57.

~ 307

jurisdiction and resources, and dependent on public acceptance for its effectiveness, it ought not to overstep its
boundaries without consideration of the
risks involved.
6. The aristocratic notion that, being a court
of law, and inheritor and custodian of
the Anglo-American legal tradition, it
ought not to go too far to the level of
politics-law being the process of reason
and judgment and politics being concerned only with power and influence.
From the above, it is clear that all the
assumptions (except the second dealing with
the judicial review) hold good in the Indian
context too,

Supreme Court Observations
While delivering a judgement in December
2007, the Supreme Court of India calle~ for
judicial restraint and asked courts not to take
over the functions of the legislature or the
executive, saying there is a broad separation
of powers under the Constitution and each
organ of the state must have respect for others
and should not encroach on others' domain,
In this context, the concerned Bench of the
court made the following observations iO :
1. The Bench said, UWe are repeatedly
coming across cases where judges are
unjustifiably trying to perfonn executive
or legislative functions. This is clearly
unconstitutional. In the name of judicial
activism, judges cannot cross their limits and try to take over functions which
belong to another organ of the state".
2. The Bench said, "Judges must know their
limits and must not try to run the government. They must have modesty and
humility, and not behave like emperors,"
3. Quoting from the book 'The Spirit of
Laws' by Montesquieu on the consequences of not maintaining separation
of powers among the three organs,
the Bench said the French political
laThe Hindu , ~Don't cross limits, apex court asks
judges~ ,

December 11, 2007.

308

P

Indian Polity

philos opher 's "warn ing is partic ularly
apt and timely for the Indian judici ary
today, since very often it is rightl y cri ticised for 'overr each ' and encro achm ent
on the doma in of the other two organ s.
4. Judici al activi sm must not becom e judicial adven turism , the Bench wa rned the
courts Adjudication must be don e within
the system of hi sto ri ca ll y va lidate d
restra ints and consc ious minim isatio n
of judge s' preferen ces.
5. "The co urts mu st not embar rass admin istrati ve autho rities and must realis e
that admin istrat ive autho rities have
exper tise in the fi eld of admin istrati on
while the court does n ot. "
6. The Bench sa id, liThe justifi cation often
given for judi cial encro achm ent on
the dom a in of the execu tive o r the
legisla ture is that the other two organ s
are not doing their jobs prope rly. Eve n
assum ing this is so, th e sa m e a l1 egations can b e m ade aga in st the judici a ry
too beca use there are cases pendi ng in
courts for half-a -centu ry."
7. If the legi sla ture or the execu ti ve was
not fun ctioni ng prope rly, it was for the
peopl e to correct the defects by exerci sing their franch ise prope rly in the n ext
N

e le ctio n s a nd voting for ca ndid ates
who would fulfil their exp ectati ons or
by other lawful metho ds, e.g., peace fu l
de monst rati o ns.
8 . "The remed y is not in th e judici ary taking over the legi slati ve or th e execu ti ve
functi ons, becau se that will not o nly
vio late the delica te bala n ce of power
e n shrin ed in the Const itutio n but also
(becau se) the judici a ry has neithe r the
expe rti se n or the resour ces to perfo rm
these functions.~
9. T he Bench sai d: "J udicia l restra i nt is
consi stent with and comp le m entary to
the balan ce of powe r amon g the three
indep enden t branc hes of the state. It
accom p li sh es thi s in two ways: first,
judici al restra int not only recog n ises
the equa lity of the other two bran ches
with the judici ary, it also foster s that
equ ality by minim i s ing in te r-b ra n ch
interf erenc e by the judici ary. Secon d,
judici al restra int tends to protec t the
indep e nde n ce of the jud iCiary. When
courts en croac h on the leg islative or
admin istrati ve fields almos t inevit ably
vote rs, leg is lators , an d oth e r elec ted
official s wil1 con cl ude that the activi ties
of judge s shou ld be closel y monit ored.

Scan the QR Code to access the conce ptual video on Judicial
and Activi sm and other impor tant topics on EDGE

Review

29

CHAPTER ,:

he con cept of Public Interest Litigation
(PIL) originated and developed in the
USA in the 19605. In the USA, it was
designed to provide legal representatio n to previously unrepresented groups and interests. It
was undertaken in recognition of the fact that
the ordinary marketplace for legal services
fails to provide such services to significant
segments of the population and to significant
interests, Such groups and interests i~c1ude
the POOT, environmentalists, consumers, racial
and ethnic minorities, and others.'
In India, the concept of PIL is closely
related to the concept of judicial activism. The
emergence of PIL is mainly attributed to the
judicial activism role of the Supreme Court. In
other words, the PIL is an outcome of judicial
activism. In fact, the PIL is the most popular
form (or manifestation) of judicial activism.
In India, the PIL was introduced in the
early 1980s. Justice V.R. Krishna Iyer and
Justice P.N. Bhagwati were the pioneers of the
concept of PIL.
The PIL is also known variously as Social
Action Litigation (SAL), Social ]nterest Litigation (SIL) and Class Action Litigation (CAL).

T

t MEANING OF PIL
?

The introduction of PIL in India was facilitated
by the relaxation of the traditional rule of ' locus
sltmdi'. According to this rule, only that person
whose rights are infringed alone can move the
court for the remedies, whereas, the PIL is an
isalancing the Scales of Justice - Financing Public
Interest Law in America (A Report by the Council
far Public Interest Law) 1976, pp. 6-7.

Public Interest
Litigation

exception to this traditional rule. Under the PIL,
any public-spirited citizen or a social organisation can move the court for the enforcement
of the rights of any person or group of perso ns
who because of their poverty or ignorance or
socially or economically disadvantaged position
are themselves unable to approach the court for
the remedies. Thus, in a PIL, any member of the
public having 'sufficient interest' can approach
the court for enforcing the rights of other persons and redressal of a common grievance.
The Supreme Court has defined the PIL as
~a legal action initiated in a court of law for
the enforcement of public interest or general
interest in which the public or a class of the
community have pecuniary interest or some
interest by which their lega l rights or liabilities are affected."
The PIL is absolutely necessary for maintaining the rule of law, furth ering the cause
of justice and accelerating the pace of realisation of the constitutional objectives. In other
words, the real purposes of the PIL are:
(i) vindication of the rule of law,
(ii) facilitating effective access to justice to
the socially and economically weaker
sections of the society, and
(iii) meaningful realisation of the fundamental rights.

t FEATURES OF PIL
The various features of the PIL are explained
below,
1. The PIL is a strategic arm of the legal aid
movement and is intended to bring justice within the reach of the poor masses,

310 { l lnd;on Polity
who co nstit ute t he low vis ibili ty area of
huma n ity.
T
2. he PI L is a tota ll y d iffe rent kin d of
litigat ion from the ordi na ry traditional
liti ga ti o n whi c h is esse n t ia ll y of a n
a dversa ry c harac ter whe re the re is a d ispute be twee n two l itiga ting parties, o ne
mak in g c laims see k i ng re li ef agai n st
t he oth e r and that oth e r oppos in g suc h
cla im or res istin g suc h re li ef.
3. TIl e PI L is b ro ught befo re t he Co urt not
fo r the purpo se of enforc in g the righ t
of o ne indi vidua l a gai nst ano th er <IS
ha ppe n s in the case of ord inary li t igatio n, bu t it is inte nded to p romo te a nd
vin d icate pub lic intere st.
4 . The PI L de man ds th at v io latio n s of
co nst it utio na l a nd lega l r igh ts of large
numb e rs o f peo pl e who arc poo r, ig norant or in a socia ll y or eco nom icall,Y
d isa dvan taged pos itio n shou ld not go
unn ot iced a nd u nred ressed .
5. Th e PIL is esse ntia ll y a co-ope rati ve effo rt
o n t he part of the petit io ner, th e State
or Pub li c Aut hor ity, a nd the Cou rt ro
secure obse rvC:ln ce of the co nsti tu tio nal
or lega l rights, be nefi ts a nd privil eges
con fe rred upo n the vuln erab le sect ions
of th e co mm un ity a nd to reach socia l
just ice to them.
6. In th e PIL, litigat ion is unde rtake n for
the purpo se of redres si ng p ubl ic i nj ury,
en forc ing pu bl ic d uty, pro tectin g socia l,
collec tive, di ffused righ ts a nd i n te rests
or vin d ica ting pu bli c in terest.
7. In the PIL, the role hel d by the Co urt
is m o re asse rtive than i n tra di t io nal
actio ns; it is creati ve rather tha n passive
a nd it ass um es a more pos it ive atti t ud e
in dete rm in ing acts.
8. T hough in th e PIL court e njoys a degre e
of flex ibili ty un known to the trial of
tr<ldit io nal p r ivate Jaw li tiga tions, wha teve r the p roced ure adopt ed by t he court
it mu st be p roced u re known to judici a l
tene ts and cha racter istics of a judic ial
proce ed ing.

9. In a PIL, u nli ke t rad itio na l d ispu te resolut ion mec ha ni sm , th ere is n o de ter minat ion o n a dj udi cat ion of indi vid ual
rights.

~ SCOPE OF PIL
In 1988, t he Sup re me Co u rt form ul ated a set
o f gu ide l in es to be fo ll owed for e n te rta in ing
letters o r petit ions rece ived by it as PIL. T hese
guide li nes were modif ied i n 1993 a nd 2003.
Accor di ng to them, the le tters or peti tions
fa ll ing un de r th e fo ll ow ing c<Hegor ies a lo ne
will ord i nari ly be entert a ined as PI L:
1. Bo nded la bour ma tte rs
2. Negle cted ch ild re n
3. Non-p aymen t ofm in imu nl wages to worke rs and ex pl o itatio n of casua l wor kers
a nd co mplai n ts of vio la tion of Labo ur
Laws (exce pt in in d ivid ua l cases)
4. Pet itio n s from ja il s co m p lain in g of
harass me nt, for p re- matur e re leHse a nd
seekin g re lease afte r havi ng co m p leted
14 yeilfS in ja il, deat h in j ail , t ra nsfer,
re lease on perso na l bon d , speed y trial
as a funda men ta l r igh t
5. Petitio ns aga in st poli ce for refus ing to
reg iste r a case, hmass men t by police ,md
death in pol ice c ustody
6. Petit io ns agtlin st <ltrocities on wo me n , in
partic ul ar harass me n t of b ride, brideburni ng, rape, m urd er, ki d na ppi ng, etc.
7. Pet it ions co m p la in ing of harass m ent or
tort ure of vill agers by co-vi ll agers o r
by po lice from perso ns be lo ngin g to
Sc hed ul ed Caste <lnd Sched uled lT ibes
a nd econ o m ica ll y backw ard classe s
8. Petitio ns perta i ning to e nvi ron me n tal
po ll utio n , d is tu rbH nce of eco logica J ba la nce, d rugs, food adulte rat ion , maint ena nce of her itage a nd c ulture , a n tiqu es,
forest and wil d life and ot her matte rs of
publi c im portan ce
9. Pe titio ns from r iot-v ict im s
10. Fami ly pe n s io n

Public Interest Utigotion

,..

The cases falling under the following categories ","'i1J not be entertained as PIL:
1. Landlord-tenant matters
2. Service matter and those pertaining to
pension and gratuity
3. Complaints against CentrallState Government departments and Loca l Bodies
except those relating to item numbers (1)
to (10) above
4. Admission to medical and other educational institution
5. Petitions for early hearing of cases pending in High Courts and Subordinate
Courts

t PRINCIPLES OF PIL
The Supreme Court evolved the following
principles in regard to PIL2:
1. The Court in exercise of powers under
Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution
can entertain a petition fi led by any
interested person in the welfare of the
people who are in a disadvantaged position and thus not in a position to knock
the doors of the Court. The Court is
constitutionally bound to protect th e
Fundamental Rights of such disadvantaged people and direct the State to fulfil
its constitutional promises.
2. When the issues of public importance,
enforcement of the fundamental. rights
of large number of people vis-a-vis the
constitutional duties and functions of
the State are raised, the court treat a let.
ter or a telegram as a PIL. In such cases,
the court relaxes the procedural laws
and also the law relating to pleadings.
3. Whenever injustice is meted out to a large
number of people, the court will not
hesitate to step in to invoke Articles 14
and 21 of the Constitution of India as
well as the International Conventions
2Guruvayur Devaswom Managing Committee vs. G.K.
Rajan, 2003.

~ 311

on Human Rights which provide for a
reasonable and fair tria1.
4. The common rule of locus standi is relaxed
so as to enable the court to look into the
grievances complained on behalf of the
poor, deprived, illiterate and the disabled
who cannot vindicate the legal WTong or
legal injury caused to them for violation
of any constitutional or legal right.
5. When the Court is prima facie satisfied
about violation of any constitutional
right of a group of people belonging to
the disadvantaged category, it may not
allow the State or the Government from
raising the question as to the maintain·
• abiJity of the petition .
6. Although procedural laws apply on PIL
cases, the question as to whether the
principles of res judicata 3 or principles
analogous thereto would apply depend
on the nature of the petition and also
facts and circumstances of the case.
7. The dispute between two warring groups
purely in the realm of private law would
not be allowed to be agitated as a PIL.
8. However, in an appropriate case, although
the petitioner might have moved a
Court in his/ her private interest and for
redressa l of the persona l grievances, the
Court in furtherance of the public interest may treat it necessary to enquire
into the state of affairs of the subject of
li tigation in the interest of justice.
9. The Court in special situations may
appoint Commission or other bodies
for the purpose of investigating into
the al1 egations and finding out facts.
It may a lso direct management of a
p ubli c institution taken over by such
Commission.
~e principle that when a matter has been fina lly
adjudicated upon by a court of competent jurisdiction
it may not be reopened or challenged by the original
parties or their successors in interest. Itsjustification
is the need for finality in litigation. Oxford Dictionary
of Law, Eighth Edition, 2015, p. 537.

312

P

Indian Polity

10. T he Co urt will no t ordi nar il y transgrc8s
into a policy. It shall a lso take utmost
care not to tran sgress its jurisdi c tion
while pu rporti ng to protect t he r ights
of th e pcop le fro111 bein g viola ted .
II. T he Court wo uld o rdinaril y not step out
of th e kno wn ,1feas of j udi c ia l review.
The Hi gh Co urt a lthough may pass a n
orde r for doin g complete justice to t he
pa rti es , it do es no t have a power <Ikin
to Artic le 142 of t he Co nst itutio n of
Ind ia.
12. Ord inaril y the High Court sho ul d not
entertai n a writ pet ition by way of PIL
quesrioning co nstitutionality or va li dity
of a statute or a statuto ry rul e.
•

t GUIDELINES FOR ADMITTING PIL
T he PIL has now co me to occupy a n impor'
tall( fi e ld in th e admini strati o n of la w. It
shou ld not be a llowed to become ' Publi city
In terest Litigat ion ' or 'Politics In terest Liti gatioll' or ' Priva te Inte rest Liti gation' or ' Pa isa
In terest Liti gat io n ' or 'M iddl e-cl a ss Interes t
Lit igat ion' (MI L).
Th e Su pre m e Co urt , in thi s context ,
o bserved: "PI L is not il pill or a pamlcea fo r
a ll wro ngs. It wa s essentia ll y meant to protect ba s ic human rights of the wea k an d the
di sadva ntaged and was a procedure wh ich was
inn ovated wh e re a publi c-spirited perso n files
a petiti on in effe ct o n be ha lf of such persons
who on acco un t of pove rty, helpl essness or
eco n omi c a nd social di sa bilities co uld not
approa c h th e co urt for re lief. Th e re ha ve
bee n , in rece n t times i ncreasingly instan ces
of a buse of PIL. T herefore, there is a need 1O
re-e mphasi se the parameters within whi c h
PIL ca n be resorted to by a pe titioner a nd
entertained by t he court.""
4 BALCO Employees Union

vs. Union of II/d ill, 2001 .

T herefore, th e Su pre me Cou rt la id down
the fo ll ow in g gu ide lines for checki ng the
mi suse of the PIL5 :
1. T he Court mu st e nco ura ge ge nuin e and
bona fide PI L an d effecti vel y d isco u rage
and c urb the PIL fil ed fo r extraneous
co ns ide rat io ns.
2 . In stead of eve ry in dividual Judge devising
his/ he r own p rocedu re for dea li ng with
PIL, it would be a pp ro p r iate fo r each
Hi gh Court to properly for m u late rul es
for enco u ragi ng the ge nuin e PI L filed
and di scourag ing PIL fi led wi th ob lique
mot ives.
3. The Co urt sh ould prima facie ve ri fy th e
c redential s of th e petitioner before
e nte rta inin g the PIL.
4 . Th e Court sha ll be primCl fac ie sat isfie d
regardi ng the co rrectn ess of th e co nte nts
of petit io n before e ntert<l in ing the PIL.
5. The Co urt s hould be fu ll y sarisfied {hat
sub sta nt ia l publi c in terest is in vo lved
be fore e nterta inin g th e petitio n .
6. Th e Court shou ld ensure that the pct ition
whi c h invo lves larger publi c inte rest,
gravity and urge ncy mu st be given priority over other petition s.
7. T he Co u rt before en tertai ning the PIL
must ensu re thac the PIL is a im ed at
red ressa I of ge nu ine publi c harm a nd
publi c i njury. T he Cou rt sho uld al so
e nsure that th ere is no pe rsona l gai n ,
pri v,ate motive or ob liq ue motive behind
fil ing I' l L.
8. T he Court should a Iso ensure that the petition fil ed by bu sy bodies for extraneo us
and ulterior mo tives m ust be di scou raged by impos in g exe mplary costs or
adopt in g similar novel met hod s to c urb
frivo lous petition s a nd t he pe ti t io n s
fi led for ext raneou s co n si dera ti ons.
"S /llI C of Utt{fmJlc1wl vs. Ba/wlInt Singlr ClwllJlal, 20 10.

I

I

I

In this Part...
30. Governor
31. Chief Minister
32. State Counc il of Ministers
33. State Legisl ature
34. High Court

35. Subordinate Courts
36. Tri bunals
37. Consumer Commissions
38. Lok Adala ts and Other Courts

30

CHAPTER :

h e Const itutio n of India envisa ges the
sam e patter n of gover nmen t in the
states as that for the Centre , that is, a
parlia menta ry system . Part VI of the Const itution deals with the gover nmen t in the states.

T

Artic1~s 153 to 167 in Part VI of the Co n-

stituti on deal with the state executive. The
st.ate execu tive co n sists of the gover nor,
the chief min ister, the counc il of minis ters
an d the advoc ate gener al of the state. Thus,
there is no office of vice-g overn or (in the
sta te) like that of Vice-Preside nt at the Centre.
The gover nor is the chief execu tive head
of the state. But, like the Presid ent, hel she is
a nomin al execu tive head (titula r or con stitu tion a l head) . The gover nor also acts as an
agent of the centra l gover nmen t. There fore, •
the office of gover nor has a dual role.
Usua ]]y, there is a gover nor for each state,
but the 7th Const itution al Amen dmen t Act of
1956 faci li tated the appoi ntmen t of the same
perso n as a gover nor for two or more states.

t APPOINTMENT OF GOVERNOR
The gover nor is neithe r direct ly electe d by
the peopl e nor indire ctly electe d by a specially consti tuted electo ral colleg e as is the
case with the Presid ent. He/sh e is appoi nted

Governor

by the Presid ent by warra nt under his/ her
hand and sea l. 1n a way, he/ she is a nomin ee
of the Centr al govern ment. But, as held by
the Supre me Court in Hargo vind Pant easel
( 1979), the office of gover nor of a state is not
an emplo ymen t under the Centr al gover nment. It is an indep enden t const itutio nal
office and is not under the co ntrol of or subordin ate to the Centr al gover nmen t.
The Draft Const itutio n p'TOvided for the
direct electi on of the gover nor on the basis
of unive rsa l adult suffrage. But the Const ituent Assem bly opted for the prese nt system
of appoi ntmen t of gover nor by the Presid ent
beca use of the follow ing reason s lR;
1. The di.rect electi on of the gover nor is
incom patibl e with the parlia menta ry
system establ ished in the states.
2. The mode of direct electio n is more likely
to create conni cts b etwee n the gover nor
and the chief minis ter.
3. The gover nor being only a consti tution al
(nom inal) head, there is no point in
makin g elabor ate arrang emen ts for his/
her electi on and spend ing huge amou nt
of money .
vs. Rag/luklll Tilak ( 1979).
laCol1stituent fi.ssembly Debates, Volum e lV, pp. 588-607.

I Hargou ind Pam

314

P

Indian Polity

4. Th e e lecti o n of a gove rnor would be
entirely on personal issues. Hence, it is nOl
in the national inte rest to involve a large
number of voters in such an election.
5. An e lect ed governo r wo uld naturall y
be lo ng to a party a nd would not be a
ne utra l pe rson a nd a n impa rtia l head.
6. The e lecti on of gove rnor would c rea te
se para ti st tend en cies a nd thu s affect
th e politi cal stability a nd uni ty of th e
country.
7. The syste m of Pres id e ntial nomination
enables the Centre to maintc1in its control
over the sta tes.
8 . T he direct election of the gove rn or c reates
.a se r io us probl e m o f lea de rship a t th e
tim e o f a ge ne ra l electi o n in t he sta te.
9. Th e chi ef mini ste r would like hi s/ h er
no minee to contest for govern o rship.
Hen ce, a second ra te man of t he ruling
party is e le cted as gove rnor.
There fo re, t he Am erican mode l, where th e
Govern o r o f a stat e is directl y e lected, was
dro pped and th e Ca nadia n model , where the
gove rn or of a p rov in ce (state) is a ppointed by
t he Governor-Ge n e ral (Ce ntre), was acce pted
in th e Con stitue nt Asse mbl y.

QUALIFICATIONS, OATH
AND CONDITIONS
Qualifications
Th e Co n stitutio n lays down o nl y two qualifica tion s for the appo intm e nt of a person as a
gove rnor. Th ese are:
1. He/ she should be a c iti ze n of India .
2. He/she should have completed the age of
35 years.
The Sarkaria Commiss ion on Centre-State
Re la tions ( 1983-88) made th e following recomm e ndations with regard to the selection
and a ppointm e nt of a gove rnor:
1. A person to be appo inted as a Governor
should sati sfy th e following criteria:
(i) He/ she should be e minent in som e
walk of life.
(H) He/s he should be a person from
outside the statc.

(iii) He/ she should be a detached figure
and 110t too intimatel y connected
with the 10Cil i politi cs of th e state.
( iv) He/ she should be a pe rson who has
not take n too g rea t a part in politi cs ge ne rall y, a nd pa rti cula rl y in
t he rece n t past.
2. It is des ira bl e tha t a politi c ian frolll
th e ruling party at the Ce n t re is not
a ppointed as Govern o r of a sta te whi ch
is being run by so mc othe r pa rty or a
combinatio n of other parti es.
3. In order to e nsu re effe cti ve consultation
with the sta te c hi ef mini ster in th e
se lection of a pe rso n to be appo inte d as
Gove rn or, th e procedure of co nsulta tio n
sh ould be presc ribed in the con stitut io n
itse lf by suitabl y a me nding Article 155.
4. Th e vice-Pres id e n t of India and th e
spea ke r of th e Lok Sa bha may be co nsulted by th e Prime Ministe r in sel ecting
a Governof. Thi s co nsul tation should be
confide ntia l and in fo rm a l and should not
be a matter of co nstitution a l obligat ion .

Oath or Affirmation
Be fore e nte rin g upon hi s/ h e r offi ce, th e
governor ha s to ma ke a nd subscribe to an
oath or affirmation . In hi s/ her oath , the
gove rnor swea rs:
(a) to faithfull y exec ute th e office;
(b) to p rese rve, protect a nd defend th e
Co nstitution and the law; a nd
(c) to devote him scLUherselfto the se rvice a nd
we ll-being of the peopl e of th e state.
The oath of office to the governor is administe red by the chief justi ce of the conce rn ed
state high court and in hi s/her absen ce, the
se nior-most judge of that court available.
Every pe rson di scharg ing the fun ction s of
th e gove rnor al so unde rta kes th e similar oa th
or a ffirmation .

Condit ions of Office
Th e Con stitution lays down th e followin g
conditions fOf th e th e governor's office:
I . He/ she should not be a member of e ithe r
House of Parliam e nt or .a I-louse of the

Governor

state legislature. If a ny such perso n is
a ppoi nted as governor, hel she is dee med
to have vacated hislher seat in that House
on the date on which helshe e nters upon
hi s/ her offi ce as the governor.
2. He/sh e should not h old a ny oth e r offi ce

of profit.

•

I

3. He/ she is e n titled without pay me n t of
re nt to the use of his/ h er officia l res ide nce (the Raj Bhauan).
4. Helshe is e ntitl ed to such e molum ents,
a ll owa n ces and pri vil eges as ma y be
dete rmin ed by Parli a me n t.
5. Whe n the sa me pe rso n is a ppointed as
th e govern or of two o r mo rc states, the
e molu me n ts a nd a ll owa nces paya bl e
to him / he r a re sha red by the states in
such p roporti on as determin ed by th e
Presiden t.
6. His/he r emolum ents a nd allowa nces ca nnot be dim in ished du ri ng h is/ h er te rm
of offi ce.
In 201 8, the Pa rliam e nt has inc reased t he
salary of the governor fro m f l.lO la kh to
f3.5 0 lakh pe r mon th .2
Like the Preside n t, the gove rnor is a lso
e ntitl ed to a number of pri vil eges and im m un iti es. He / sh e e njoys pe rso n a l immunity
from lega l liability for hi s/ her offici a l acts.
Durin g hi s/ her te rm of offi ce, he/sh e is
immune fro m a ny crimina l proceedings, even
in respect of his/ he r pe rso na l acts. He/she
ca nnot be a rrested or imp riso n ed. Howeve r,
after giving two mon ths' notice, civil proceedings can be in stituted against him / h er during
hi s/h e r te rm of offi ce in respect of his/ he r
person al acts.

t TERM OF GOVERNOR'S OFFICE

\

A governor holds offi ce for a term of fi ve

\

(

"

,\
\

years from the date on wh ich he/she ente rs
upon hi s/ h er offi ce. However, this term of
fi ve years is subj ect to the pleasure of the
Preside nt. Further, he/ she can resign a t a ny
ZVide the Finance Act, 2018, with effect from 1st Jan·
uary, 201 6. This Act amended the Govern or's (Emol·
uments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982.

~ 315

tim e by addressing a resignati on letter to the
Preside nt.
In the Surya Nara i l1 easeJ ( 1981 ), the Supreme
Court held that the pleasure of the Preside nt is
not justifiable. The governor has no security of
tenure a nd no fixed term of offi ce. He/she may
be re moved by the President at a ny time.
The Constitution does not lay down a ny
gro u n ds up on whi c h a gove rnor may be
removed by the Presiden t. He nce, the Nationa l
Front Governme nt headed by V.P. Singh (1989)
asked a ll the governo rs to resign as th ey were
appointed by the Co ngress governm ent. Eventually, so me of the governors were replaced
a nd some were a llowed to con tinue. The sa me
.thing was repeated in 1991, when the Co ngress
Governm e nt headed by P.V. Nara simha Rao
changed fourtee n governors appointed by the
V.P. Singh a nd Chandra Sekha r govern me nts.
Th e Pres ide nt may tra n sfe r a Govern or
a ppointed to one state to a nothe r state for
th e rest of t h e te rm . Furth e r, a Gove rnor
whose te rm has expired may be reappo inted
in th e sa me state or a ny oth er state.
A gove rn or can hold office beyond hi s/
her term offi ve yea rs until his/ he r successo r
assum es cha rge. The unde rly ing idea is that
the re must be a gove rn or in the sta te a nd
there ca nnot be an in terregnum.
The Presid e nt can ma ke such provi sio n
as h e/ she thinks fit for t he disch a rge of the
fun ctio n s of th e gove rn o r in any co n tin gen cy not provided for in the Co nstituti on ,
for exa mpl e, t he death of a sitting govern or.
Thu s, the chief justi ce of th e concern ed sta te
high cou rt may be appointed te mporaril y to
disch a rge th e fun ct ion s of th e govern or of
tha t state.

POWERS AND FUNCTIONS
OF GOVERNOR
A gove rn or possesses executive, legislat ive,
finan cia l a nd judicial powe rs more or less
a nalogous to the Preside nt ofInd ia. Howeve r,
he/sh e h as no diplom a ti c, mili ta ry or e mergency powe rs like the Pres ide nt.

JSurya Narai" vs. Un ion of india (198 1).

316 ,(t! Indian Polity
T he powe rs a nd fun cti o ns of th e gove rn o r

can be stud ied under the fo ll owing heads:
1. Execu t i ve powers.

2. Leg isla ti ve powers.
3. Finan cia l powe rs.
4 . Judi ci.] l powers.

Executive Powers
T he execut ive powe rs a nd fu nction s of the
Govern or a re:
1. All e,.xecu tive actio ns of the government ofa

sta te are fonnally ta ken in hi s/her name.

Z. He l she ca n make ru les spec ifyi ng the
m a n ner in wh ich the Orders an d other

instrum en ts made and execu ted in his/

her na me sha ll be a u the n ticated.

3. He / she can make ru les for more can·
ven ie nt tra nsactio n of the busi ness of
a state gove rnm e n t an d for the a ll oca-

tio n a mo ng the m in iste rs of the sa id
bus iness.

4. Hel she appoints the chief m in ister an d
ot her m ini sters. Th ey a lso ho ld offi ce
durin g his/ her pleasu re. T here should be
a Triba l Welfare mi nister in the states of
Chattisgarh, Jha rkhand, Madh ya Pradesh
a nd Odisha a ppo inted by h imlher. The
state of Bi har WilS excluded fro m this p rovision by the 94 th Am end me nt Act of 2006.
5. I-re/ she a ppo in ts the advoca te general of a
state and de term in es his / her re mu nera ·
tion. Th e advoca te genera l ho lds office
duri ng the pleasure of the governor.
6. He/ she ilppo in ts t he state elect ion co mm i ssioner an d d e t erm i n es h is / h e r
co n ditions of se rv ice a nd ten ure of
office. However, the state elect io n co m missioner ca n be re moved o n ly in l ike
manner and o n the like grou nd s as a
j udge of a h igh court.
7. He/she a ppo ints the chairm an and members of th e state p ub li c se rvice com m ission . However, they can be rem oved only
by th e Pres id e nt and not by a gove rn or.
8. He/ she can seek a ny informat io n rela tin g to t he ad mini stra ti o n of the a ffa irs
of th e state a nd p ro posa ls for legisla tio n
fro m the chi ef m in ister.

9. He/ she ca n req uire the chi ef mini ster
to su bmit fo r t he co nside ration of th e
co u nci l of mi nisters a ny matter o n whic h
a decisio n has bee n take n by a ministe r
but wh ich has not bee n considered by the
coun c il.
10. He / she ca n reco mm e n d th e im pos it io n
of constit uti o nal e m e rgency in a state
to th e Preside n t. Du r ing the period of
Pres ide n t's rul e in a state, the gove rnor
e nj oys ex te nsive executive powers a s a n
a ge n t of the Pres ide nt.
11. He/ she acts as the chancellor of uni versities in the state. He/ she also apPOi n ts the
vice-cha ncellors of un iversities in the SL:1te.

Legislative Powers
A gove rn or is an integra l part of th e sta te
leg isla tu re. In t ha t ca pac ity, he / she has the
fo ll owing legislative powers a nd fu nct ions:
1. He/ she ca n su m mon or p rorogue the state
leg isla tu re a nd d isso lve the state legislative asse m bly.
2. He/ she ca n address the state legislature.a t
the comme nceme n t of t he first sessio n
after each genera l e lect io n and the fi rst
sess ion of each yea r.
3. He / she ca n send m essages to the ho use
o r ho u ses o f t he sta te leg islature, with
respect to a b ill pend ing in the leg islature or otherwise.
4. He / she can appo in t any membe r of the
State legislative asse mbly to preside over
its proceed ings whe n t he offices of both
the Spea ke r and the Depu ty Speaker fall
vaca n t. Sim ila rl y, he l she ca n a p po in t
any mem be r of t h e state legisla tu re
co u ncil to p reside over its p roceed ings
whe n t he offices of both Cha irm a n a nd
De puty Cha irm a n fa ll vacant.
5. He/ she no mina tes on e-sixth of the m embe rs of t he sta te legislative co un c il fro m
amo ngst perso n s hav ing spec ia l k now)·
edge or practical experie nce in lite rature, scie nce. art, coope rative m ovement
a nd soc ia l serv ice.
6. He/ she no minated (before 2020) one member to the State Legislative Assembly fro m

;,

the Anglo-Indian commun ity. However,
the 104th Constitutional Amendment Act
of 2019 has discontinued this provision.
7. He/she decides on the question of disqualification of members of the state
legislature in consultation with the
Election Commission.
8. When a bill is sent to the governor after it
is passed by state legislature, he/ she can:
(a) Give his/ her assent to the bill, or
(b) Withhold his/ her assent to the bill,
or
(c) Return the bill (if it is not a money
bill) for reconsideration of the
state legislature. However, if the bill
is passed again by the state legislature with or without amendments,
the governor has to give his/ h er
assent to the bill, or
(d) Reserve the bill for the consideration
of the President. In one case such
reservation is obligatory, that is,
where the bill passed by the state
legislature endangers the position
of the state high court. In addition,
as identified by Soli Sorabji, the
fonner Attorney-General of India,
the governor can also reserve the
bill if it is of the following nature:4
(i) Ultra-vires, that is, against the
provisions of the Constitution.
(ii) Opposed to the Directive Principles of State Policy.
(iii) Against the larger interest of
the country.
(iv) Of grave national importance.
(v) Dealing with compulsory acquisition of property under Artic1e
31A of the Constitution.
9. He/she can promulgate ordinances when
the state legislature is not in session.
These ordinances must be approved by
the state legislature within six weeks
fro m its rea ssembly. He/ she can also
withdraw an ordinance anytime. This
4Soli Sorabji, The Governor: Sage or Saboteur, Roli
Books (New Delhi), 1985, p. 25.

is the most important legislative power
of the governor.
The Supreme Court'sjudgement relating
to the ordinance-making power of the
Governor in the D.C. Wadhwa case 4a
(1986) is worth mentioning here. In that
case, the court pointed out that between
1967-1981, the Governor of Bihar promulgated 256 ordinances and all these
were kept in force for periods ranging
from one to fourteen years by repromulgation from time to time. The court
ruled that successive repromulgation of
ordinances with the same text without
any attempt to get the bills passed by
the Assembly would amount to violation
of the con stitution and the ordinance
so repromulgated is liable to be struck
down . It held that the exceptional power
of law-making through ordinance cannot be used as a substitute for the legislative power of the state legislature.
10. He/ she lays the reports of the State Finance
Co mmission , the State Public Service
Commission and the Comptrol1er and
Auditor-General relating to the accounts
of the state, before the state legislature.

Financial Powers
The financial powers and functions of the
governor are:
1. He/ she sees that the Annual Financial
Statement (state budget) is laid before
the state legislature.
2. Money bills can be introduced in the
state legislature only with his/ h er prior
recommendation.
3. No demand for a grant can be made
except on hi s/her recommendation.
4. He/she can make advances out of the
Contingen cy Fund of the state to meet
any unforeseen expenditure.
5. He / she constitutes a finance commission after every five years to review the
financial pOSition of the panchayats and
the municipalities.
4ID.C Wadhwa vs. State of Bihar (1986).

318

,(1' Indion Polity

Judicial Powers
Th e j udicia l powers an d fu n ct io ns of th e
govern or are:
1. He/ she ca n gra n t pardo ns, rep ri eves,
respites and re mi ssion s of p uni shm en t
or susp end, re mi t an d com mute th e
sente n ce of a ny pe rso n co n victed of
any offen ce again st a ny law re latin g to
a matter to whi ch th e executi ve power
of th e state extends.
2. He / she is con sulted by the Presi dent
whil e appoin ting th e judges of the co ncern ed state high co urt.

3. He / she makes a ppoi ntmen ts, posti ngs
and p ro motions of the d istri ct judges in
co nsu1tat ion with th e state hi gh cou rt.
4. He/ she also appoints persons to the j udicial service of the state (oth er than d.istrict
judges) in co nsultation wit h th e state
high court and the Sta.te Public Service
Co mmission.
Now, we wi ll stud y in de ta il the th ree
importa n t powers of th e gove rnor (veto
power, ordi nance-mak in g power and pardoning power) by co mpa r in g them wit h th at of
th e Pres ident in l'il bles 30.1/ 30.2 an d 30.3
respect ive ly,

Table 30.1 Comparing Veto Powers of President and Governor
President

With Regard to Ordinary Bills

--,.

Governor

the Houses

When a state bill Is reserved by the governor for the
consideration of the President, the President has three
alternatives:
(a) He/she may give his/her assent to the bill, the bill
then becomes an act.
(b) He/she may withhold his/her assent to the bill, the
bill then ends and does not become an Ac t.
(c) He/she may return the bill for reconsideration of the
House or Houses of the state legislature. When a bill is
so returned, the House or Houses have to reconsider
it within six months. If the bill is passed by the House
or Houses again with or without amendments and presented to the President for his/her assent, the President
Is not bound to give his/her assent to the bill. He/she
may give hisfher assent to such a bill or withhold his/
her assent.

When the governor reserves a bill for the consideration
of the President, he/she will not have any further role
in the enactment of the bill. If the bill is returned by the
President for the reconsideration of the House or Houses
and Is passed again. the bill must be presented again for
the Presidential assent only. If the President gives his/her
assent to the bill, it becomes an act. This means that the
assent of the Governor Is no longer required.

Governor

Every money bill after it is passed by the Parliament, is
presented to the President for his/her assent. He/she
has two alternatives:
1. He/she may give his/her assent to the bill, the bill
then becomes an act.
2. He/she may withhold his/her assent to the bill, the
bill then ends and does not become an act.
Thus, the President cannot return a money bill for
the reconsideration of the Parliament. Normally. the
President gives his/her assent to a money bill as It
is introduced in the Parliament with his/her previous
permission.

-

-~

When a Money Sill Is reserved by the Governor for
the consideration of the President, the President has
two alternatives:
(8) He/she may give hlsJher assent to the bill, the bill
then becomes an Act.
He/She may withhold his/her assent to the bill, the
bill then ends and does not be-come an act.
Thus. the President cannot return a money bill for the
reconskleratlon of the state legislature (as in the case
ofthe
I

Table 30.2

~ 319

Every money bill. after it Is passed by the state legislature (unicameral or bicameral), is presented to the gover·
nor for his/her assent. He/she has three alternatives:
1. He/she may give his/her assent to the bill. the bill
then becomes an act.
2. He/she may withhold his/her assent to the bill, the bill
then ends and does not become an act.
3. He/she may reserve the bill for the consideration of
the President.
Thus. the governor cannot return a money bill for the
reconsideration of the state legislature. Normally, the gover·
nor gives his/her assent to a money bill as it is introduced
in the state legislature with his/her previous permission.
When the governor resetveS a money bill for the consid·
eratlon of the President, he/she will not have any further
role In the enactment of the bill. tf the President gives
his/her essent to the but, it becomes an Act. this means
that the assent of the governor Is no longer required.

Comparing Ordinance-Making Powers of President and Governor
President

Governor

1. He/she can promulgate an ordinance only when
both the Houses of Parliament are not In session
or when either of the two Houses of Parliament is
not in session. The second provision Implies that an
ordinance can also be promulgated by the President
when only one House is in session because a law
can be passed by both the Houses and nol by one
House alone.

1. He/she can promulgate an ordinance only when the
legislative assembly (In case of a unicameral legislature) is not In session or (in csse of a bl<ameral legis·
lature) when both the Houses of the state legislature
are not in session or when either of the two Houses of
the state legislature Is not in session. The last provision
implies that an ordinance can be promulgated by the
governor when only one House (in case of a bicameral
legislature) is in session because a law can be passed
by both the Houses and not by one House alone.

2. He/she can promulgate an ordinance only when
he/she Is setlsfled that circumstances exist which
render It ne-cessary for hlmlher to take immediate

2. He/she can promulgate an Ordinance only when he!
she is satisfied that drcumstances exist which render
It ne-cessary for himlher to take Immediate action.

3. His/her ordinance·making power is co-extensive
with the legislative power of the Parliament. This
means that he/she can issue ordinances only on
those subjects on which the Parliament can make
laws.

3. HIs/her ordinance-making power is co·extenslve
with the legislative power of the state legislature.
This means that he/she can issue ordinances only
on those subjects on which the state legislature can
make laws.

action.

_

__._--

4. An ordinance issued by hlm/her has the ssme force
and effect as an act of the Parliament.

'--r

4. An ordinance issued by him/her has the same force
and effect as an act of the state legislature.

(Contd.J

320

P

Indian Polity
Presldcnt

Governor

5. An ordinance issued by hfm/her Is subject to the
same limitations as an act of Parliament. This
means that an ordinance issued by him/her will be
InvaUd to the extent it makes any provision which
the Parliament cannot make.

5. An ordinance issued by him/her is subject to the
same limitations as an act of the state legislature.
This means that an ordinance Issued by him/her will
be Invalid to the extent it makes any provision which
the state legislature cannot make.

6. HoIshe can wIIIIdr8w 111 ordInIoC;e -',.", _ .
7. His/her ordinance-making power is not a discretionary power. This means that he/she can promulgate
or withdraw an ordinance only on the advice of the
council of ministers headed by the prime minister.

7. HIs/her ordinance-making power Is not a discretionary power. This means that he/she can promulgate
or withdraw an ordinance only on the advice of the
council of ministers headed by the chief minister.

_11
9. An ordinance Issued by him/her ceases to operate

9. An ordinance Issued by him/her ceases to operate on

on the expiry of six weeks from the reassembly of
Parliament. It may cease to operate even earlier
than the prescribed six weeks, if both the Houses
of Parliament passes resolutions disapproving it.

the expiry of six weeks from the reassembly of the
state legislature. It may cease to operate even earlier
than the prescribed six weeks, If a resolution disapproving it is passed by the legislative assembly and
is agreed to by the legislative council (In case of a
bicameral legislature).

Table 30.3

Comparing Pardoning Powers of President and Governor
Presldent

Governor

1. He/she can pardon. reprieve, respite. remit, suspend

1. He/she can pardon. reprieve. respite. remil suspend or commute the punishment or sentence of
any person convicted of any offence against a state
law.

or commute the punishment or sentence of any person convicted of any offence against a Central law.

3. He/she can grant pardon. reprieve, respite, suspension. remission or commutation In respect to punishment or senwnce by • court-martial (military court).

3. He/she does not possess any such power.

Governor

CONSTITUTIONAL POSITION
OF GOVERNOR
The Constitution of Indi a provides for a parlia mentary form of government in the states
as in the Ce ntre. Co nseque ntl y, the governor
h as b een m ade only a nomina l executive,
the real execu"tive con stitutes the coun cil of
ministers h eaded by the chief mini ster. In
other words, the governor has to exercise his/
h er powers a nd functions with the aid and
advise of the coun cil of ministe rs h eaded by
the chief minister, except in m atters in which
he/ she is required to act in his/ her discretion
(I.e., without the advice of ministers).
In estimating the constitutional position
of the governor, pa rticula r refe ren ce has to
b e made to the provision s of Articles 154, 163
a nd 164. These are:
(a) The executive powe r of the state shall
be vested in the governor a nd shall be
exercised by him / her either directly or
through officers subordinate to him /
her in accordance with this Con stitution
(Article 154).
(b) There shall be a council of ministers with
the chief minister as the head to a id and
advise the governor in th e exercise of
his/ her functions, except in so far as he /
she is required to exercise his/ h er fun ctions in his/ h e r discretion (Articl e 163).
(c) The council of ministers shall be collectively responsible to the legisla tive
assembly of the state (Article 164). This
provision is the foundation of the parliamentary system of government in the state.
From the above, it is clear that con stitutional position of the governor differs from
that of the Preside nt in the following two
respects:5
1. While the Constitution envisages the possibility of the governor acting at times
in his/ her discretion, no such possibility
h as been envisaged for the President.
2. After the 42nd Constitutional Amendment (1976), ministerial advice h as
SM..P. Jain, Indian Constitutional Law, Wadhwa,

Fourth Ed, p. 186.

~ 321

bee n made binding on the President, but
no such provi sion ha s been made with
respect to the governor.
The Con stitution makes it clear tha t if a ny
question arises whether a matte r falls within
the governor's discretion or not, the dec ision
of the governor is final and the validity of
anything done by him/ h er cannot be called in
question on the ground that he/she ought or
ought not to have acted in his/ her discretion.
The governor has constitutional discretion in
the foHowi ng cases:
1 . Reservation of a bill for the consideration
of the President.
2. Recommendatio.n for the imposition of
the President's Rule in the state.
3 . While exercising hislher functions as the
administrator of an adjoin ing union territory (i n case of additional charge).
4. Determining the amount payable by
th e Government of Assam, Meghalaya,
Tripura and Mizoram to an autonomous Triba l District Council as royalty
accruing from li ce nses for mineral
exploration 6 •
In addition to the above constitutional
discretion (Le., the express discret ion mentioned in the Constitution), the gove rnor, like
the President, a lso has situational discretion
(Le., the hidden discretion de rived from the
exigencies of a prevailing political situation)
in th e following cases:
1 . Appointment of chief minister wh e n no
party has a clear-cut majority in the
state legi slative assembly or when the
c hief mini ster in office dies suddenly
and there is no obvious successor.
6Paragraph 9(2) of the Sixth Schedule says: 'If any
dispute arises as to the share of such royalties to be
made over to a district council, it shall be referred
to the governor for determination and the amount
determined by the governor in his/ her discretion
shall be deemed to be the amount payable to the district council and the decision of the governor shall
be final'. The Sixth Schedule contains the provisions
as to the administration of tribal areas in the States
of Assam, Meghalaya, 'I'ripura and Mizoram.

I

I

I
I

I

322

,(y Indian Polity

2. Dismissal of the counc il of ministers
when it can not prove the co nfidence of
the state legislative assembly.
3. Dissolution of the state legislative assembly if the counc il of ministers h as lost
its majority.
Moreover, the governor has certain special
responsibilities to discharge according to the
directions issued by the President. In this regard,
the governor, though has to consult the council of ministers Jed by the chief minister, acts
finally in his/her discretion. They are as fo!Jows:
] . Maharashtra- Establishment of separate
development boards for Vidarbha and
Marathwada.
2. Gujarat-Establishment of separate development boards for Saurashtra and Kutch.
3. Naga land- With respect to law and order
in the state for so long as the in terna l
disturbance in the Naga Hills-Thensang
Area continues.
4. Assam-With respect to the administra tion of tribal areas.
5. Manipur-Regarding the administration
of the hill areas in the state.
6. Sikkim-For peace and for ensuring social
and economic advancement of the different sect ion s of the population.
7. Arunachal Pradesh-With respect to law
and order in the state.
8. Karnataka-Establishment of a separate
development board for HyderabadK.:1.rnataka region 7 •
Thus, the Const itutio n ha s assigned a dual
role to the office of a governor in the Indian
federal system. He/she is the constitutional
h ead of the state as well as the representative
of the Centre (Le. , President).

ISSUES IN THE GOVERNOR'S
FUNCTIONING
The Sarkaria Commission on Centre-State
Relations (1983-88) identified vario us issues
in the functioning of the Governor. These
7This provision was added by the 98th Constitutiona l
Amendment Act of 2012.

issues are contin uing and relevant even today.
The Comm ission has explained them in the
following way:
]. In Choosing Chief Minister: Soo n after
an e1ection when a single party or a
coa lition emerges as the largest single
party or group, there is no difficulty in
the selection and appointment of a Chief
Min ister. However, where no single party
or group command absolute majority, the
Governor has to exercise his discretion in
the selection of Chief Minister. In such a
situation, the leader of the party or group
which, in so far as the Governor is able
to ascerL:1.in, has the largest suppo rt in
the Legislative Assembly, may be called
upon to form the Government, leaving
it to the Assembly to determine the
question of co n fidence. This procedure
leaves little scope for any a llegation of
unfairness or partisanship on the part of
the Governor in the use of his discretion.
Such a situation may also arise when a
Ministry resigns after being defeated in
the Assembly or because it finds itself in
a minority.
2. ]n Thsting Majority: The Governors
have emp loyed various ways to determin e wh ich party or group is likely to
command a majority in the Legislative
Assemb1y. Some have relied only on
lists of supporters of rival claimants
produced before them. In other cases,
physical verification by counting heads
was carried out.
3. In Dismissal of Chief Minister: There
has been no uniformity in regard' to
the criteria adopted for dismissal of
a Chief Min ister. Obviously, a Chief
Minister can not continue in office after
he ceases to command a majority in the
Legislative Assembly. It is normal fo r a
Chief Minister to resign immediately or
face the Legislative Assembly to prove
that he cont inu es to enjoy majority
support.
4. In Dissolving the Legislative Assembly:
Various Governors have adopted different
approaches in sim ilar situations in regard

Governor

,. - to dissolution of the Legislative Assembly.

The advice of a Chief Minister, enjoying
majority support in the Assembly, is normally binding on the Governor. However,
where the Chief Minister had lost such
support, some Governors refused to dissolve the Legislative Assembly on his
advice, while others in similar situations,
accepted his advice, and dissolved the
Assembly.
5 . In Recommending President's Rule: In
a number of situations of political
instability in the States, the Governors
recommended President's rule under
Article 356 without exhausting all possible steps under the Constitution to
induct or maintain a stable government.
The Governors concerned neither gave
a fair chance to contending parties to
form a Ministry, nor allowed a fresh
appeal to the electorate after dissolving the Legislative Assembly. Almost
all these cases have been criticised on
the ground that the Governors, while
making their recom mendations to the
President, behaved in a partisan manner. Further, there has been no uniformHy of approach in such situations.
6. In Reserving Bills for President's
Consideration: The Governors' reservation

,

Table 30.4

Articles Related to Governor at a Glance

Qrtlcle No

Subject-matter

1

~ 323

of State Bills passed by the Legislature for
the consideration of the President have
created a controversy in some cases.
7. Regarding Nominations to Legislative
Council: The use of discretion by
Governors in the nomination of members to the Legislative Council has been
criticised. These actions have been criticised on the ground that the Governors
have no discretion in such matters.
8 . Regarding Exe~cise of Discretion as
Chancellor of University: The use of
discretion by Governor, in nominating
members of a University Councilor
University functionary, in his capacity
as Chancellor of a University in the
State, has also come in for criticism. In
several State Universities, the concerned
legislations specifically provide that the
Governor by virtue of his office shall
be Chancellor or head of the University
and by these legislations certain powers
have been conferred on the Chancellor.
The Governors have exercised their powers as Chancellor under the statute and
not as Governor. These actions of the
Governors have again been questioned
on the premise that they have to abide
by the advice of the Council of Ministers
even in such cases.

153.

Governors of states

lS4.

Executive power of state

155.

Appointment of Governor

156.

Term of office of Governor

157.

Qualifications for appointment as Governor

158.

Conditions of Governor's office

159.

Oath or affirmation by the Governor

160.

Discharge of the functions of the Governor In certain contingencies

161 .

Power of the Governor to grant pardons and others

162.

Extent of executive power of state
(Contd.)

324

fJ'

ArtIcle No

Indian Polity
Subject-matter

163.

Council of ministers to aid and advise the Governor

164.

Other provISions as to mkdsters like

165.

Advocate-General for the state

ota state

166.

..--

.term. ~

167.

Duties of the Chief Minister regarding furnishing of information to the Governor, and so on

174.

SessIons of the ..... legislature. pcorogatIon and dissolutIOn

175.

Right of the Governor to address and send messages to the house or houses of state legislature

176.

Special address by the Gov8f~no
::.
, _ _ _ •_ _ _ _--'_................o.il:.O....i:>:

200.

Assent to bills (I.e. assent of the Governor to the bllls passed by the state legislature)

201 .

Bills

217.

Go...- being consutted by tile Presldenlln
Courts

..._ 2.3.3.
234.

Appointment of dlstrictlud~g;e;';b~Y;t;h~e~G;O;vrte~'~n~od';;j;:;t;jii;;;~~;;;;;:;;ii
Appointments of po""ns <_tIIan Judge<)

Govemor.

.

CHAPiliER
"

31

n the scheme of parliamentary system
of government provided by the Constitution, the governor is the nominal
executive authority (de jure executive) and
the Chief Minister is the real executive
authority (de facto executive). In other words,
the governor is the head of the state while the
Chief Minister is the head of the government.
Thus the position of the Chief Minister at
the state level is analogous to the position of
prime minister at the Centre.

I

t

,

APPOINTMENT OF CHIEF
MINISTER

The Constitution does not contain any specific procedure for the selection and appointment of the Chief Minister. Article 164 only
says that the Chief Minister shall be appointed
by thegovernoT. However, this does not imply
that the governor is free to appoint a nyone
as the Chief Minister. In accordance with the
conventions of the parliamentary system of
government, the governor has to appoint the
leader of the majority party in the state legislative assembly as the Chief Minister. But,
when no party has a clear majority in the
assembly, then the governor may exercise his/
her personal discretion in the selection and
apPointment of the Chief Minister. In such a
situation, the governor usually appoints the
leader of the largest party or coalition in the
assembly as the Chief Minister and ask him /
her to seek a vote of confidence in the House
within a month.
The governor may have to exercise hislher
individual judgement in the selection and

Chief Minister

appointed of the Chief Minister ~hen the Chief
Minister in office dies suddenly and there is no
obvious successor. However, on the death of a
Chi ef Minister, the ruling party usually elects
a new leader and the governor has no choice
but to appoint himlher as Chief Minister.
BThe Constitution does not require that a
person must prove his/ her majority in the
legislative assembly before helshe is appointed
as the Chief Minister. Th e governor may first
appoint himlher as the Chief Minister and then
ask himlher to prove his/ her majority in the
legislative assembly within a reasonable period.
A person who is not a member of the state
legislature can b e appointed as Chief Minister
for six months, within which time, helshe
should be elected to the state legislature, failing
which he/she ceases to be the Chief Minister.
Further, the Chief Minister may be a member of any of the two Houses of a state legislature. Usually Chief Ministers have been selected
from the Lower House Oegislative assembly),
but, on a number of occasions, a member of
the Upper House Oegislative council) has also
been appointed as Chief Minister.
The Sarkaria Commission on Centre-State
Relations (1983-88) made the following recommendations with regard to the selection
and appointment of a chief minister:
1. In choosing a chief minister, the Governor
should be guided by the following
principles:
(i) The party or combination of parties
which commands the widest support in the Legislative Assembly
should he called upon to form the
government.

326

,( f Indian Polity

(ll) The Governor's task is to be see that a
government is formed and not to try
to form a governme nt whi ch will purslle policies which he/ she ap proves.
2. If t here is a s in g le party ha vi ng a n
absolute majorit y in the Leg is lative
Assembl y, t he leader oftha( party shou ld
automatically he asked to become the
chi ef m ini ster. Howeve r, if there is no
such pany, the Govc rnor shou ld se lect
a chief minister from among the following parties o r g rou ps of parties by
so u nd ing them, in turn, in the orde r of
pre fe rence ind icated below:
(i) An allia nce of pJrties that was
for m ed p r ior to th e elections.
(ii) T he largest s ingle party sta kin g a
claim to form the governm en t with
th e support of othe rs, incl ud ing
in dependents.
(iii) A post-electo ral coal it ion of parties,
wi th a ll the partners in the coalitio n join ing the govern me nt.
(iv) A post-electoral allian ce of parties,
with so m e of the pani cs in the
a ll iance for min g a governme n t
a nd th e rema ining pa rties, i ncl uding independents, s upport ing th e
gove rnm en t fro m outs id e.
The Gove rn or wh ilc go ing through the
process desc ribed above sho u ld select
a lea der wh o in hi s/ her (Gove rnor's)
judgeme nt is m ost likely to co mm a nd
a majority in t he Legi slative Asse mbl y.
3. A c hi ef mini ste r, un less he / she is the
leader of a party, wh ic h has a bso lute
majo rit y in th e Legi s lati ve Assem bl y,
sh o uld seek a vo te of confidence in the
Legislative Asse mbl y wit hin 30 days of
takin g over.
4. When a number of members of t he
Legis la t ive Asse mbl y a p proac h t h e
Gover n or a nd c ont es t th e c laim of
th e in cumb ent chi ef mini ste r to co ntinued majority support in the Legislat ive
Asse mbl y, the Gove rn or should not r isk
a dete rmin at io n of this iss ue of majority support, on h is / her own, o uts id e

t he Legis la tive Assem bly. The prud e nt
course for him / her wo uld be to cause
the rival claims to be tested o n the:: floor
of the Ho use.

t OATH, TERM AND SALARY
Befo re the Chief Minis ter e nt e rs h is/ h e r
office, the governor adm in isters to him / he r
the oaths of office and secrecy. I III his/ her
oath of office, rhe Ch ief Mi n ister swea rs:
1. to bear trlle fa ith and a ll egiance to the
Con sti tu tion of Ind ia,
2. to uphold the sovere ignty and i ntegr ity
of I neiia,
3. to faithfully and conscien tiously djscharge
the duties of h is/ he r offi ce, and
4. to do ri ght to a ll manner of peop le in
accordance with the Constitut ion and
the law, wil hout fear or fa vo ur. affect ion
or ill -will.
In h is/ her oath of sec re cy, t h e Chi ef i"'l inisler swears t ha t he / she will not di rectly or
indi rec tl y co mmuni ca te or revea l to any
perso n (s) an y matter that is brough l uncle r
h is/ her co n si de rat ion or becomes known to
him / her as a state mini ster except as ma y
be requi red for the du e disc ha rge of hi s/ h er
duties as such mini ster.
T he te rm of t he Ch ief Mi !liste r is not fixed
a nd he / she holds office during the plea sure
of th e governo r. Howeve r, thi s does n ot m ean
that th e gove rn or can d ism iss hi m / h er at
any ti m e. He/s he ca nnot be dismi ssed by th e
gove rnor as long as he/ she e nj oys the maj o rity support in the legislat ive assembl y.2 Bu t,
if he/sh e loses the confi de nce of the assembly, he / sh e mu st resign or t he gove rn o r ca n
d ism iss him / her.
IThe form of oath of office and secrecy for the Chi ef
Minister is sim ilar to that for any state minister.
2-rh is was ruled by the Supreme Court in S.K BOllllllai
vs. Ull iull of I lldia ( 1994). Howeve r, there have been
many vio lations of this rule, whereby the governors
have dismissed the Chief i\'l inistcrs wit hout giving
them a n op portunifY to prove their majority in the
legisl<Hive asse mbly.

c

Chief Minister

The salary and allowances of the Chief
Minister arc determined by the state legislature. In addition to the salary and al1owances,
which aTC payable to a member of the state
legislature, he/s he gets a sumptuary allowance, free accommodation, trave lling allowance, medical facilities, etc.

1

POWERS AND FUNCTIONS
OF CHIEF MINISTER
The powers and fun ctions of the Chief Minister can be studied under the following heads:

In Relation to Council of Ministers
The Chief Minister enjoys the following powers as head of the state coun cil of ministers:
(a) The governor appoints only those
persons as ministers who are reco mmended by the Chief Mini ster.
(b) He/she allocates and reshuffies the portfolios among ministers.
(c) He/she can ask a minister to resign or
advise the governor to dismiss him / her
in case of difference of opinion.
(d) He/she presides over the meetings of the
council of ministe rs and influences its
decisions.
(e) He /she guides, directs, co ntro ls and
coordinates the activities of all the
ministers.
(I) He/she can bring about the collapse of the
council of ministers by resigning from
office. Since the Chief Minister is the head
of the council of ministers, his/her resignation or death automatically dissolves
the council of ministers. The resignation
or death of any other minister, on the
other hand, merely creates a vacancy,
which the Chief Minister mayor may not
like to fill.
•

In Relation to the Governor
Th e Chief Minister enjoys the following
powers in relation to the governor:
(a) He/sh e is the principal channel of com·
muni catio n between the governor and

~ 327

the council ofministers.3 Jt is the duty of
the Chief Minister:
(i) to com municate to the Governor of
the state all decisions of the council
of ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the state and
proposals for legislation;
(ii) to furnish such information relating
to the administration of the affairs
of the state and proposals for legislation as the governor may caB for;
and

(iii) if the governor so requires, to submit for the con sideration of the
council of ministers any matter on
which a decision ha s bee n taken
by a minister but which h as not
b een co nsidered by the council.
(b) He/she advises the governor with regard
to the a ppointment of important offi·
cials like advocate general, chairman
and members of the state public service
commission, sta te e lection co mmi s·
sioner, and so on.

In Relation to State Legislature
The Chief Minister 'enjoys the following
powers as the leader of the house:
(a) He/she advises the governor with regard
to the summoning and proroguing of the
sessions of the state legislature.
(b) He/she can recommend the dissolution of
the legislative assembly to the governor
at any time.
(e) He/she announces the government polio
cies on the floor of the house.

Other Powers and Functions
In addition, the Chief Minister also performs
the following functions :
(a) He/she is the chairman of the State
Planning Board .
JA rticie 167 specifically deals with this function of
the Chief Minister.

,

328

(J' Indian Pality

(b) He/she acts asa vice-chairman of the con-

cerned 7..ona l counci l by rotat ion, holding
office for a period of on c year at a ti me."
(e) He/she is a me mbe r of the Inte r-State
Council and the Governing Council of NIT I
Aayog, both headed by the prime min ister.
(d) He/ she is the chief spokesman of the state

govern me nt.

(e) He/ she is the cris is manage r-ill-chi ef at
the poli tica l level during e merge nc ies.
(f) As a le.:1 der of the state, he/ she meets various sections of the people and rece ives
me mo randa from the m regardi ng the ir
prob le ms, a nd so on .
(g) He/she is the leader of the party in power.
(h) He/she is the political head of the services.
Thu s, hel she plays a very significa nt a nd
highly cruc ial role in the state administration.
However, the disc retionary powers enjoyed by
the governor reduces to some extent the power,
authority, influence, prestige a nd role of the
Chi e f Minister in the state admini stration .

r

RELATIONSHIP WITH
THE GOVERNOR

The followin g provIsions of t he Con stitution deal with t he re lat io nsh ip betwee n the
governor and the "Chi ef Minister:
1. Article 163: There sha ll be a council of
ministers with the Chi e f Minister as the
4 Un ion

home minister is the chai rm an of all the
zonal councils.

Table 31.1
Article No

Articles Related to Chief Minister at a Glance
Subject mailer

163.

Council of Ministers to aid and advise Governor

166.

Conduct of business of the Government of a Stale

177.

Rights of Ministers as respects the Houses

head to aid a nd advi se t he gove rn or on
the exe rc ise of hi s/ h e r fun ction s, except
in so fa r as he/ she is requi red to exerc ise
hi s/ her function s or any of them in his/
her di scretion .
2. Article 164:
(a) The Chief Minister shall be appointed
by the governor and othe r ministers
sha ll be appO in ted by t he governor
on the advi se of the Chi ef Minister;
(b) The min isters shaH hold office during
the pleasure of the governor; and
(e) The coun c il of mini sters shall be
co llectivel y respo nsibl e to the legislative asse mbly of the state.
3. Article 167: It shall be the duty of the
Chi ef Minister:
(a) to co mmuni ca te to th e governor of
th e state all deci sion s of th e council
of mi ni sters re la tin g to the adm inistration of the affairs of th e state
a nd proposa Is fo r legislation;
(b) to furnis h such informatio n re la ting
to the ad m inistra ti on of t he affairs
of the state an d proposals for leg islatio n as the gove rnor may call for;

and

(c) if th e governor so requires, to submit
for the co ns ideration of the coun c il
of ministe rs a ny matte r on whi ch
a dec isio n ha s bee n taken by a
mini ste r bu t whi c h ha s not been
considered by the coun c il.

.'

CHAp·
, liER

32

s the Constitution of India provides
for a parliamentary system of government in the states on the Union pattern, the council of ministers headed by the
chief ministe r is the real executive authority
in the politico-administrati ve system of a
state. Th e council of ministers in the states is
constituted and function in the same way as
the council of ministers at the Centre.
The principles of parliamentary system of
government are not detailed in the Constitution; but two Articles (163 and 164) deal with
them in a broad, sketchy and general manner.
Article 163 deals with the status of the council
of ministers while Article 164 deals with the
appointment, tenure, responsibility, qualifications, oath and salaries and allowances of the
ministers.

A

't CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
Article I63-Council of Ministers
to aid and advise Governor

1. There shall be a Council of Ministers with
the Chief Minister as the head to aid
and advise the Governor in the exercise
of his/ her functions, except in so far as
he/ she is required to exercise his/ h er
functions in his/ her discretion.
2. If any question arises whether a matter
falls within the Gove rnor's discretion
or not, decision of the Governor shall
be fina l, and the validity of anything
done by the Governor shall not be called
in question on the ground that he/ she
ought or ought not to have acted in his/
her discretion.

State Council
of Ministers

3. The advice tendered by Ministers to the
Governor shall not be enquired into in
any court.

Article l64-0ther Provisions
as to Ministers
1 . The Chief Minister shall be appointed by

the Governor and the other Ministers
shall be appointed by the Governor
on the advice of the Chief Minister.
However, in the states of Chh attisgarh,
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and Odisha,
there shaH be a Minister in charge of
tribal welfare who may in addition be
in charge of the welfare of the schedul ed castes and backward classes or
any other work. The state of Bihar was
excluded from this provision by the 94th
Amendment Act of 2006.
2. The total number of ministers, including
the chief minister, in the council of
ministers in a state shaH not exceed
15 per cent of the total strength of the
legislative assembly of that state. But,
the number of ministers, including the
chief minister, in a state shall not be less
than 12. This prov ision was added by the
91st Amendment Act of 2003.
3. A member of either House of state legislature belonging to any political party
who is disqualified on th e ground of
defection shall also be disqualified to be
a ppointed as a minister. This provision
was also added by the 91st Amendment
Act of 2003.
4. The ministers shall hold office during the
pleasure of the Governor.

330

Ind;an PaUly

5. The co uncil of ministers shall be collectively respo nsib le to the state Legislative
Assembly.
6. The Governor sha H administer the oaths
of office a nd sec recy to a minister.
7. A mini ste r who is not a member of the
sta te leg islature for any pe ri od of s ix
co nsecut ive month s shall cease to be a
mini ster.
8. Th e sa laries and a Uowa nces of ministers
shall be determined by the state iegisiahlrc.

Article 161>-Conduct of Business
of the Government of a State
1. All executive action of the Govern ment

of a State shall be ex pressed to be taken
in the name of the Governo r.
2. Orders a nd other in struments made and
executed in the name of the Governor
shall be authenticated in such manner
as may be specified in rules to be made
by the Governor. Further, the va lidity
of a n order or in strument which is so
authenticated sh all not be ca ll ed in
quest ion on the groun d that it is not an
orde r or in strum ent mad e or executed
by the Governor.
3. T he Governor sha ll make ru les for the
more co nve ni e nt transaction of the bus iness of the government of t he state, and
for the a ll ocation among ministers of the
sa id bu siness in so fa r as it is not bu siness with respect to which the Governor
is required to act at his/ her discretion.

Article 167-Duties of Chief Minister
It shall be the duty of the Chi ef Minister of
each sta te
1. to co mmuni cate to the governor of
the state all dec isions of the council of
mi n iste rs relating to the administration
of the affai rs of the sta te and proposals
for legi sl<ltion
2. to furni sh suc h information relating to
the adm i ni stra tion of the affairs of t he
state a nd proposals for legisl ation as t he
governo r may ca ll for

3. If the governor so req uires, to su bmit for
the consideration of the coun cil of mi nisters any matter o n which a decision has
been taken by a mi nister but which has
not been considered by the co uncil

Article I 77-Rights of Ministers
as Respects the Houses
Eve ry mi nister shaH have the right to speak
and take part in the pro ceed ings of the
Assemb ly (and a lso t he Cou n ci l where it
exis ts) a nd a ny Co m mittee of the State Leg islature of wh ic h he/ she may be named a member. But he / she shall not be entitled to vote.

t

NATURE OF ADVICE
BY MINISTERS

Article 163 provides for a counci l of ministers
with the chief minister at the head to aid and
advise the governor in the exercise of his/ her
fu nct ions exce pt for the discretio na ry ones.
If any question arises whether a matter fa lls
within the governo r's di scretion or not, the
dec ision of the governor is final and the validity
of anythi ng don e by himlher can not be ca ll ed
in qu estion o n the ground tha t he/sh e ought or
ought not to have acted at hi s/he r cliscretion.
Purther; the natu_rc of advice ten dered by m in isters to the governor can not be enqui_red by any
cou rt. This provision emphasises the intimate
and the co nfide ntial rela60nship bet\\Tccn the
governor and the mini sters.
In Slwmsher Singh easel (1974), the Supreme
Court held that e.xcept in spheres where the gov.
ernor is to act at his/ he r discretion, the governor
has to act on the aid and advice of the council of
ministers in the e.-xercise of hislher powers and
functions. He/ she is not requ ired to act person·
ally without the aid and advice of the counci l
of mini sters or against the a id and advice of the
counci l of ministers. Wherever th e Constitution
requ ires thc &1t isf.:1ctioll of the governor, the sa tisfaction is not the personal &1tisfaction of the
gove rnor bu t it is the satisfactio n of the co unc il
of min isters.
'Shamsher Sing/! vs. State of Punjab (t974).

State Council of Ministers.

~ APPOINTMENT OF MINISTERS
The chief minister is appointed by the
governor. The other ministers are appointed
by the governor on the advice of the chief
minister. This means that the governor can
appoint only those persons as ministers who
are recommended by the chief minister.
But, there should be a tribal welfare
minister in Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and Odisha 1a • Originally, this
provision was applicable to Bihar, Madhya
Pradesh and Odisha. The 94th Amendment
Ac~ of 2006 freed Bihar from the obligation
of having a tribal welfare minister as there
are no Schedul ed Areas in Bihar now and
the fraction of population of the Schedu led
Tribes is very smal1. The same Amendment
also extended the above provision to the
n ewly fo.rmed states of Chhattisgarh and
Jharkhand .
Usually, the members of the state legislature, either the legislative assembly or the legislative council, are apPointed as ministers. A
person who is not a member of either' House
ofthe state legislature can also be appointed
as a minister. But, within six months, he/she
must become a member (either by election or
by nomination) of either House of the state
legislature, otherwise, h e/she ceases to be a
minister.
A minister who is a member of one House
of the state legislature ha s the right to speak
and to take part in the proceedings of th e
other House. But, he/she can vote only in the
House of which he/sh e is a member.

j

OATH AND SALARY
OF MINISTERS

Before a minister enters upon hi s/her office,
the governor administers to him / h er the
oaths of office and secrecy. In his/her oath
of office, the minister swears:
1. to bear true faith and allegia nce to the
Constitution of India,
laThey may, in addi ti on, be in charge of the welfare
of the SCs and BCs or any other work.

~ 331

2. to uphold the sovere ignty and integrity
of Indi a,
3 . to faithfully and co n sc ielitioilsJy discharge the duties of his/ h er office, and
4. to do right to all manner of people in
accordance with the Constitution and
the law, without fear or favour, affection
or ill-wil1.
In his/ h er oath of secrecy, the mini ster
swears that he/she will hot directly or indi ~
rectly co mmunicate or reveal to any pefson(s)
any matter that is brought undef his/her considera tion or becomes known to him/her as a
state minister except as m ay be required for
the due discharge of his/her duties as such
minister.
The sala ri es and al10wances of ministers
are determined by the state legislature ftom
timeto time. A mini ster gets salary and allowances, whi ch are payable to a member of the
state legislature. Additiona ll y, he/she gets a
sumptuary a llowance (according to his/ h er
rank), free accommodation, travelling allowance, medical facilities, etc.

~ RESPONSIBILITY OF MINISTERS
Collective Responsibility
The fundamental principle underlying the
working of parliamentary system of government is the principle of co ll ective responsib ili ty. Article ]64 clearly states that the
council of mini sters is co llectively responsible to the legislative assembly of the state.
This means that all the ministers own joint
responsibility to the legi slative assembly
for all their acts of omission and commission. They work as a tcamand sivi mor si nk
together. When the legislative assembly
passes a no-confidence motion against the
co un cil of mini sters, all the ministers have
to resign includin g those ministers who are
from the legislative counci1 2• Alternatively,
2Each minister need not resign separately; tlie· resignation of the chief minister amounts to the resignation of the entire council of ministers.

332 ,~ Indian Polity
the co un c il o f mini sters ca n advice th e governor to di ssolve the leg-islative assembly o n
th e gro und t hat the House docs not reprcsc nt
t h e vi ews of th e e lectorate fa it h full y a nd
ca ll for fres h e lec tion s. The gove rn or may
not o bli ge the co un c il of mini sters wh ich
ha s lost t he con fide n ce of t he leg islative
asse mbl y.
The prin c iple of co ll ective responsib ili ty
a lso mea ns that t he cabinet decis ion s bind
all ca b ine t mini ste rs (a nd other m iniste rs)
even if they defe rred in the cabi net mee ti ng.
It is th e duty of every min ister to sta nd by
the ca binet dec isio ns a nd sup port t he m both
within and outsid e the state legi slature. If
any mi n ister di sag rees with H cabinet dec is ion a nd is not prepared to defe nd it, he / she
must resig n. Several ministers have resig ned
in th e past owing to their differen ces with the
cabin et.

Individual Responsibility
Article ] 64 al so co nta in s the pr in ciple of
i ndi vidual respo ns ibi li ty. It states that th e
mini sters hold office during th e pleasure of
the govern o r. T hi s means that t he governor
ca n remove a m in ister at a tim e wh en th e
co un ci l of mini ste rs e njoys t he co nfidence
of the leg islati ve assembl y. But, the govern or
can re move a mini ste r only on the adv ice of
th e chief m in iste r. In case of diffe rence o f
o pini o n o r dissati sfa ction with t he pe rforman ce of a mini ster, t he chi ef mini ste r ca n
ask him / h e r to res ign or advi se th e gove rn or
to d ism iss him / he r. By exe rc ising thi s power,
t he chi ef m i nister ca n ensu re the real isat io n
of the ru le of collective respon sibility.

No Legal Responsibility
As at the Ce ntre, the re is no proviSion in the
Constit ution for th e syste m of lega l responsib ility of the mini ster in the states. It is not
required that a n o rder of the gove rnor for a
publi c ;:ICt should be co un te rsign ed by a minister. Moreove r, the courts a re barred from
enquiring into the na ture of advice re nd ered
by the mini sters to the governor.

COMPOSITION OF THE COUNCIL
OF MINISTERS
T he Co nstitut io n does not specify th e size of
the sta te co un ci l of ministers o r the ra nking
of ministers. T hey are deter min ed by t he
c hi ef mini ste r acco rding to th e exige nc ies of
th e tim e and requirements of t he s ituati o n.
Like at th e Ce ntre, in t he sta tes t.oo, th e
co u ncil of III i nisters co nsists of th ree ca tegories of mi n iste rs, namely, cabin et mini sters,
mini sters of state, a nd de puty min isters.
Th e diffe ren ce be twee n t he m li es in their
respective ranks, emolum en ts, a nd poli tical
impo rta nce. At the top of a ll these mini sters
stands the chi ef min iste r- supre me gove rning
a u thori ty in t he sta te.
At tim es, the co uncil of min isters may a lso
incl ud e a deputy chi ef mini ste r. The de puty
chief min isters are il ppoin ted mostl y for loca l
po lit ica l rea sons.
The ca bin e t mini sters head the importa nt
depa rtments of the state government like
hom e, edu cat io n, fi nance, agr iculture a nd
so forth J. They are me mbers of the cab in et,
attend its mee tings a nd play a n importa nt
rol e in dec idin g poli c ies. T hus, the ir responsibili ties extend over the entire ga Illu t of state
gove rnm e nt.
T he ministe rs of state ca n e ither be give n
indepe nde nt charge of de partm e nts or can be
attached to cab inet ministers. However, they
are not members of the ca binet and do not
attend the cabin et mee tings unl ess spec ially
invited when so m e thing related to their
departments a re co nsidered by t he cabinet.
Next in ra nk are th e de pu ty mini ste rs.
Th ey are not g iven ind epen de nt cha rge of
departments. They are attached to the cabin et
mini sters and assist them in the ir a dm in istrati ve, polit ica l and pa rliam e ntary dut ies. T hey
Hre not mem bers of the ca bin et a nd do not
atte nd cabinet mee tings.
l.y>he term 'mi nistry' or 'ministries' is used on ly in

the centre and not in the states. In o ther words, lhe
state government is divided into depa rtme n ts a nd
not ministries.

State Council of Ministers

t CABINET
A smalle r body called cabinet is the nuc1 eus
of the counc il of minist ers. It consis ts of only
the cabin et ministers. It is the real centre of
autho rity in the state gover nment . It perfor ms
the following role:
1. It is the highe st decisi on-ma king autho rity in the politic o-adm inistra tive system
of a state.
2. It is the chief policy-form ulatin g body of
the state gover nmen t.
3. It is the su preme execu tive autho rity of
the state gover nmen t.
4. It is the chief coord inator of the state
admin istrati on.
5. It is an adviso ry body to the gover nor.
6. It is the chi ef crisis mana ger-an d thus
deals with all emerg ency si tuatio n s.
7. It deal s with all major legisla tive and
financ ial matte rs.

~ 333

8 . It exerci ses contro l over highe r appoi nt.
ments like const itutio nal autho rities
and senio r secret ariat admin istrato rs.

t CABINET COMMITTEES
The cabine t works throug h variou s comm ittees
called cabin et comm ittees. They are of two
types - standi ng and ad hoc. The forme r are
of a perma nent nature while the latter are of
a tempo rary nature .
They are set up by the chief minis ter
accor ding to the exigen cies of the time and
requiremen ts of the situat ion. Hence , their
numb er, nome nclat ure and comp ositio n
varies from time to time.
They not only sort out issues and fonnu late
propo sals for the consid eratio n of the cabin et
but also take decisi ons. However, the cabin et
can review their decisi ons.

Table 32.1

Articles Related to the State Council of Ministe rs at a Glance

Art icle No

SubJec t.matte r

163.

Council of Ministers to aid and advise Governor

164.

Other provisions as to Ministers

166.

Conduct of business of the Government of a State

167.

Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of information

177.

Rights of Ministers as respects the Houses

to Governor, etc.

CHAPTER

33

T

he state legislature occup ies a preeminent and centra l position in the
political system of a state.
Articles 168 to 212 in Part VI of the Constitution deal with the organisation, composition, duration, officers, procedures, privileges,
powers and so on of the state legislature.

Though these are similar to that of Parlia-

ment, there are some differences as welL

ORGANISATION OF STATE
LEGISLATURE
There is no uniformity in the organisation of
state legislatures. Most of the states have an
unicameral system, while others have a bicameral system. At present, only six states have
two Houses (bicameral). These are Andhra
Pradesh, Th langana, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar,
Maharashtra and Karnataka. The Jammu and
Kashmir Legislative Council was abolished by
the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act,
2019. 1 The Tdmil Nadu Legislative Counci l Act,
2010 has not come into force. The Legislative
Cou ncil in Andhra Pradesh was revived by the
Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council Act, 2005.
The 7th Amendment Act of 1956 provided
for a Legislative Council in Madhya Pradesh.
However, a notification to this effect has to be
made by the President. So far, no such notification has been made. Hence, Madhya Pradesh
continues to have one House only.
[The erstwhile state of Jammu and Kashmir had
ado pted a bicameral legislature by its own state
Constitution, which was separate from the Indian
Constitution.

State Legislature

The twenty-two states have a unicameral
system. Here, the state legislature consists of
the governor and the legislative assembly. In
the states havi ng bicameral system, the state
legislature co n sists of the governor, th e legislative council and the legislative assembly.
The legislative council (Vidhan Parishad) is
t he upper house (second chamber or house of
elders), while th e legislative assemb ly (Vidhan Sabha) is th e lower house (first chamber
or popular house).
The Constitution (Article 169) provides for
the abolition or crea tion of legislative councils in states. Accordingly, the Parliament can
abolish a legislative council (where it a lready
exists) or create it (where it does not ex ist), if
the legislative assembly of the concerned state
passes a resolution to that effect. Such a specific
resolution must be passed by the state assembly
by a special majority, that is, a majority of the
total membership of the assembly and a majority of not less tha n t\:vo-tltirds of the members
of the assembly present and voting. This Act of
Parliament is not to be deemed as an a mendment of the Constitution for the purposes of
Article 368 and is passed like an ordinary piece
oflegislation (ie, by simple majority).
uThe idea of having a second chamber
in the states was critic ised in the Con stituent Assembly on the ground that it was not
represen tative of the people, that it delayed
legislative process and that it was an expensive institution 2. " Consequently the provision
was made for the abolition or crea tion of a
Jai n, I"dian Constitutional Law, Wadhwa
Fourth edition , p. 159

2M .p'

·,
Stote Legislature
legislative counci l to enable a st.:1te to have a
second chamber or not according to its own
willingness and financia l strength. For exa mple, Andhra Pradesh got th e legislative council
created in 1957 and got the same abolished
in 1985. The Legislative Council in Andhra
Pradesh was again revived in 2007, after the
enactment of the Andhra Pradesh Legislative
Cou n cil Act, 2005. The legislative council of
Thmil Nadu had been abolished in 1986 and
that of Punjab and West Bengal in 1969.
In 2010, the Legislat ive Assembly ofThmil
Na du passed a resol ution for the revival of
the Legislative Co uncil in the state. Accordingly, the Parliament e nacted the Thmil Nadu
Legislative Council Act, 2010 which provided
for th e c reation of Legislative Co uncil in the
state. However, before this Act was e nforced ,
the Legislative Assemb l y of Tami l Nadu
passed anoth er resolution in 2011 seeking
the abolition of the proposed Legislative
Counci l.
The various laws made by the Parli a ment
(u nde r Article ]69 of the co n stitution ) for
the abolition or creatio n of State Legislative
Councils are mention ed in Thble 33.4.

t COMPOSITION Of TWO HOUSES
Composition of Assembly

Strength Th e legislative assembly co nsists
of representatives directly e lected by the
people on th e basis of universal adult franc hise. Its maximum strength is fixed at 500
a nd minimum stren gth at 60. It m eans that
its strength varies from 60 to 500 depending
on the population size of the state. However,
in case of Aru nach al Pradesh, Sikkim and
Goa, the minimum number is fixed at 30 and
in case of Mizoram and Naga land, it is 40
and 46 respectively. Further, some members
of the legislative assemblies in Sikkirn and
Nagaland are a lso e lected indirectly.
The strength of legislative assembli es is
indicated in Table 33.2.
Nominated Member Before 2020 , the
Governor nominated on e member from the

~ 335

Anglo-Indi an communi ty 3 to th e assembly,
if the community was not adequately represented. Originally, th is provision was to
operate for ten years (i.e., upto ]960) on ly.
Later, this duration h as b een extended co ntinuously since then by ten years each time.
The last extension upto 2020 was made by the
95th Amendment Act, 2009. But, the 104th
Amendment Act, 2019, h as not extended
further th e operati on of this provision. In
oth e r words, th e Amendm ent discontinued
this provision of special representation of the
Anglo-Indian community in the Assembly
by nomination. Consequently, this provision
ceased to have effect on the 25th January, 2020.

Territorial Constituencies For th e purpose
of ho lding direct election s to the assembl y,
each state is divided into territorial co n stitue ncies. Th e demarcation of these constituencies is done in such a mann er that the ratio
b etween the popu lat ion of each co n stitue ncy
and the numbe r of seats a llotted to it is the
same throughout the state. In other words,
the Con stitu ti on ensures th at there is uniformity of representation between different
const itue n cies in the state. The expressio n
'population' m ea n Sj the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which
th e relevant figures have been published.
Readjustment after each census After each
cen sus, a readj ustme nt is to be made in the
(a) total number of seats in the assembly
of each state a nd (b) the division of each
sta te into territorial constituencies. The
Parli ament is e mpowered to determ in e the
a u thority and the manner in which it is to
be made. Accordingly, Parl ia ment has enacted
the Delimitation Commi ssion Acts in 1952,
1962, 1972 and 2002 fo r this purpose.
3An Anglo-Indian means a person whose father or

any other male progenitor in the male line is or
was of European descent, but who is domiciled
within the territory of Ind ia and is or was born
within such territory of parents hab itually resident
therein and not established there for temporary
purposes only.

336

,rY

Ind;an Pol""

The 42n d Ame ndm e n t Ac t of ] 976 had fro-

ze n tota l numb er of seats in the asse mbl y of
eac h state an d the d ivisio n of s uch state in to
terr itoria l co nst it ue nc ies t ill the yea r 2000 at
t he 1971 leve l. T h is ba n o n readju stme n t has

bee n ex tende d fo r a nothe r years ( i.e., u pto

yea r 2026) by the 84th Ame nd me nt Act o f
2001 wi th t he sa m e obj ect ive of e nco ura gi ng

pop ulatio n lim it ing measu res.

T he 84 th Am en dm e n t Act of 2001 a lso

e mpowe red the gove r n ment to u n de rw ke

readj ustm ent a nd ra ti o nal isatio n of territo ria l
co nstitu encies in a state 0 11 the bas is of the
popu la tio n fi g ures of J99J censu s. Later, the
87th A me ndm e nt Act of 2003 p rov ided fo r
the de limi t.:1. tio ll of co nstitu enc ies on the bas is

of 2001 ce nsus a nd not 199J ce nsus. However,
thi s ca n be done witho u t alte ring the total
nu mber of sea ts in the assem b ly of each sta te.
Rese rvat ion of seat s for SCs an d STs The
Consti tu rio n prov id ed fo r the reservat io n
of sea ts fo r sched u led castes and sched uled
tribes in th e asse mbly of each state o n the
4
bas is of popu latio n ra tios.
Origin all y, thi s reserv atio n was to opem te
for te n years (Le., lip to 1960). Bu t this dura ti o n has bee n exte n ded co ntin uous ly si nce
then by 10 years eac h time. Now, un de r th e
104 t h Am e ndm e nr Act of 2019, thi s reserv atio n is to last u ntil 2030.
Th e seats rese rved fo r SCs and SIS in the
legisla ti ve assemblies is ind ica ted in Thble 33.2.

Comp ositio n of Coun cil
Stren gth Unlik e the memb ers of the leg is lati ve asse mbly, th e me mbe rs of the legis lative
co uncil a re indire ctly electe d. The max imum
stren gth of the counc i l is fixed at on e-thi rd
of the tota l streng th of the asse mbly a nd the
m in imum stre ngth is fixed a t 40. It mean s
that the size of the cou ncil de pends on the
"'T hi s means that lhe n umbe r of asse mb ly seats rese rved in a state for such castes a n d tribes is to bear
the sa me pro po rtio n to lhe tota l numbe r of seats
in the assem bly as the popula t io n of such castes
<l nd tribes in the concer ned state bears to the tota l
po pu lm io l1 of the swtc.

s ize of the assem b ly of the co nce rn ed state.
This is do ne to en sure th e p redo mina n ce of
the direct ly electe d House (asse mbly) in the
leg is lati ve affa irs of the sta te. T hough the
Co n st itu tio n has fixed the max imum a nd
the lllinim um lim its, the actua l stre ngt h o f a
Cou ncil is fixed by Pa rl iam en t.
T he st re ngth of leg isla ture co uncils is ind icated in Th ble 33.2.
Man ner of El ecti on Of the to tal n umbe r of
me mbe rs of a l eg i sl~Jti ve co un cil:
1. 1/ 3 are electe d by the me mbers of loca l
bod ies in the state like mu ni cipa li ties,
di stri ct boa rds, etc.,
2. 1/ 12 are electe d by g rad uates of th ree
years standi ng a nd res id ing within th e
state,
3 . 1/ 12 are elected by teache rs of three years
sta nd ing in t he stelte, not lower in sUIItdarel th a n seco ndary schoo l,
4. 113 are electe d by th e memb ers of the
leg islative assem b ly of th e sta te fro m
am o ngst pe rso ns who are not memb ers
of th e asse mbl y, a nd
S. the re ma inder are nomin ated by the governo r fro m a mo ngst perso ns who have
a spec ial kn owled ge or prac ti ca l ex per ience of liten:l tu re, scienc e, <'I rt, coope rati ve movem e nt a n d socia l se rvice.
Thu s, 5/ 6 of th e to tal n umbe r of me m bers
of a leg is la ti ve co un ci l a re ind irect ly e.lecte d
a nd 1/ 6 a re nom ina ted by the gove rno r. The
members ,a rc elected in accorda nce wi th the
system of propo rtio nal representa tion by mC<"l ns
of a single tra nsfera ble vote.
Th is sc heme of comp os it io n o f a leg islative coun cil as lai d down in th e Con stitutio n
is te n ta ti ve a nd n ot fina l. The Pa rl ia me n t is
a uthori sed to modify or re p lace the sam e.
Howeve r, it has not enact ed any s uch law
so far.

r DURATION OF TWO HOUSES
Dura tion of Assem bly
Like th e Lok Sa bh a, the leg isla tive asse mbly
is not a co nt in uing c h amb e ~. Its no rma l te rm
is five yea rs fro m the date of its first meet in g

State Legislature

after th e gen eral electi ons6 . The expira tion of
the period of five years opera tes as autom atic
dissol ution of the assembly. However, the governor is autho rised to dissolve the assem bly at
a ny time (i .e., even before the compl etion of
five years) to pave the way for fresh electio ns.
Furth er, tile term of the asse mbly can be
extend ed durin g the period of n ation al em ergen cy by a law of Parlia ment for on e year at
a time (fo r any length of time) . However, thi s
exte nsion ca nnot contin u e beyon d a period
of six month s after the emerg ency ha s ceased
to opera te. This m ea n ~ that the assem bly
shoul d be re-ele cted within six month s after
the revoc ation of em ergen cy.

Dura tion of Coun cil
Like the Rajya Sabha , the legisla tive council is a contin uing ch amber , that is, it is a
perma nent body and is not subjec t to dissol?tion . But, one-th ird of its memb ers retire
on the expira tion of every secon d year. So,
a m ember contin ues as such for six years.
The vacan t sea ts are filled up by fresh eJections and nomin ations (by gover nor) at the
begin ning of every third yea r. The retirin g
memb ers a re also eligib le for re-.electio n and
re-nom inatio n a ny number of times.

MEM BERS HIP OF STATE
LEGISLATURE

II IQualifications
The Co nstitu tion lays down the follow ing
qua lifi cation s for a perso n to be chose n a
memb er of the sta te legisla ture.
(a) Hel sh e must be a citize n of India .
(b) Helsh e must make and subscr ibe to an
oath or affirm ation before the perso n
autho ri sed by the Electi on Comm i ssion
for this purpo se. In hi s/ her oath or
affirm ation, hel sh e swea rs (i) 1b bear true faith and all egian ce to
the Constitutio n of India
(li) 1b uphol d the sovereignty and integrity of India
(c) Helsh e must be not less than 30 years of
age in th e case ofthe legisla tive coun cil

'tt 337

and not less than 25 yea rs of age in the
case of the leg islativ e assem b ly.
(d) Hel she must possess other qualifi cation s
prescr ibed by Parlia ment.
Accor dingly, the Parlia ment ha s laid down
the follow ing add itiona l qualif i cation s in the
Repre sentat i on of Peopl e Act ( ] 95]):
(a) A person to be electe d to the legislative
counc il must be an electo r for an assembly co nstitu ency in the co nce rned state
and to be qualif ied for the gove rnor's
nomi nation , hel sh e must be a reside nt
in the con ce rned state.
(b) A perso n to be elected to th e legisla tive
asse mbl y mu st be a n electo r for an
asse mbl y co nstitu ency in the con cerne d
state.
(e) Hel she must be a m ember of a sch edul ed
caste or sch edul ed tribe ifhe/ she wants
to conte st a seat reserv ed for the m .
However, a m embe r of sched uled castes
or sch edul ed tribes ca n also conte st a
seat not reserv ed for them.

ti lDisqualifications
Under the Const itut ion, a perso n shaH be
disqua li fied for being chose n as and for being
a memb er of the legisla tive assem bly or legislative counc il of a state:
(a) ifh e/sh e holds any office of profit under
the Unio n or state gover nmen t (excep t
that of a minis ter or an y other office
exemp ted by sta te legislatureS),
(b) ifhel she is of un sound mind and sta nds
so de clared by a court,
(e) if he/ she is an undi sch a rged insolv ent,
(d) if h e/she is not a citizen of India or has
volun tarily acqui red the citi ze nship of
a foreig n state o r is und er any ackno wledgem ent of allegiance to a foreign state,
and
(e) if he/ she is so disqualifi ed under any law
made by Parlia ment.
SA minister in the union or state govern ment is
not con sidered as holdin g a n office of profit. Also,
the state legisla ture can declare that a particu lar
office of profit wi11 not disqualify its holder from
its m ember ship.

338

(! I,dio, Polity

Accordingly, the Parli ament has presc ribed
a number of add it iona l di squa li ficat ion s
in the Representation of People Act (1951) .
T hese are s imil ar to those fo r Parliame n t.
T hese are m e nt ioned he re:
1. He/she m ust not have been fo und guilty
of certain electora l offences or corrupt
p ract ices in the electi on s.
2. He/she mu st not have been co nvicted for
a ny offen ce resulting in imprison men t
for two or more years, But, the detentio n
of a person under a preventi ve detention
law is not a di squill ification.
3. He /she mu st not have fa iled to lodge an
aCCQunt of hi s/h er ejection expe n ses
with in the time.
4 . He / she mu st not have any in terest in
gove rnment contracts, works or services.
5. He/she must not be a director or managing agent nor hold an office of profit in
a corpora tion in which the governm ent
ha s at least 25 per cent share.
6. He/ she m ust not have been d ismissed
from governme n t se rvice fo r corruption
or disloya lty to the sta te.
7. He/she mu st not have been co nvicted for
promoting enm ity between different
groups or for the offence of bribery.
8. He/ she must not have been punished for
preaching and p ra ctici ng socia l crimes
such as untou chab ili ty, dowry and sati.
On the q uestion whether a member has
become subjec t to a ny of the above disq ual ificat ion s, the governor's de c ision is final.
However, he/ she shou ld obtain the opin io n of
the Election Comm iss ion and ac t accordingly.

Disqualification on Ground of Defection The
Co n stitution also lays down that a perso n
sh a ll be disqualified for being a member of
either House of state legislature if h e/ she is
so di squalified o n the grou nd of defection
un der the provisions of the Tenth Sched ul e.
The questio n of disqua lifi cation under the
Thnth Sched ul e is decided by the Cha irma n,
in the case of legislative co unci l and, Speaker,
in the case of legislative assembly (and not by
6
the governor). In Ki /lOto H ol/olum case (1992),
6K ilIOIO Hollolwl! VS. Zacllillllll (1992).

the Supreme Co urt rul ed thar t he decision of
Chairm a n/ Speaker in thi s regard is subject to
judic ial rev iew.

g l Oath or Affirmation
Every member of e ithe r House of sta te 1egislature, before tak i ng hi s/h er seat in the I-louse,
has to ma ke and subscrib e a n oath or affi rmat ion before the governor or some person
appoi nted by hi m / her for th is purpose.
In thi s oath, a membe r of t he state legislature swears:
(a) to bear true faith and a llegiance to the
Co nstitution of India;
(b) to upho ld the sovereignty and integrity
of India; and
(c) to faithfully discharge the duty of h is/h er
office.
Un less a membe r takes the oa th , he/ she
cannot vote and parti c ipate in the proceedings of the House and does not beco me eligible to the privil eges <:lod imm uni ties of the
state leg islature.
A person is liab le to a pena lty of ~500 for
each day he / she s its or votes as a member in a
Ho use:
(a) before taking a nd subscribin g the prescribed oath or affi rm ation; or
(b) when he/s he knows that he/ sh e is not
qual ifie d or that h e/sh e is disqua l ifi ed
fo r its mem bership ; or
(c) when he/s he knows tha t he/ she is prohibited from sitting or voti ng ,i n the
Hou se by virtue of any law made by t he
Parliament or the state legislature.
The m em bers of a state legislature are
entitled to receive such sa laries a nd allowa nces as may from tim e to tim e be determined by the state legi slature.

II IVacation of Seats
In the followi.ng cases, a member of t he state
leg islature vacates his/her seat:
(a) Double Membersh ip: A pe rso n can no t
be a mem ber of both Hou ses of state
legi sla ture at one and t he same ti me. If
a person is e lected to both t he Hou ses,
hi s/h e r sea t in one of the Ho uses fa 11s

State Legislature

vacant as pe r the provisio ns of a law
m ade by the state legislature.
(b) Disqualifica tion: If a m ember of the state
legislature becomes subj ect to any of the
di squalificatio ns, hi s/ her sea t becom es
vacant.
(e) Resignation: A member may resign from
hi s/ h er seat by writing to the Ch ai rman
of legislative council or Spea ker of legislative assemb ly, as the case may be. The
seat falls vacant when the resignation is
accepted'.
(d) Absence: A House of the state legislatu re
can declare th e seat of a m ember vacant
if he/ she absen ts himself/ h erself from
all its meering for a period of sixty days
without its permiss ion .
. (e) Other Cases: A member has to vacate hi s/
her seat in the either House of state
legislature,
(i) if his/ h er election is decla red vo id
by the co urt,
(ii) if he/ sh e is expe lled by the House,
(iii) if he/ sh e is elected to the office of
president or office of vice-president, and
(iv) if he/she is appointed to the office
of governor of a state.

PRESIDING OFFICERS OF
STATE LEGISLATURE
Each House of sta te legislature h as its own
presiding officer. There is a Speaker and a
Deputy Speaker for the legislative assembly
and a Ch airman a nd a Deputy Chairma n for
the legislative co uncil. A panel of chairma n
for the assembly and a panel of vice-chairman
for the council is also apPointed.
The salaries and allowan ces of the Speaker
a nd the Deputy Speaker ofthe assembly and
the Chairm an and the Deputy Chairman of
the council are fixed by the state legislature.
They are ch a rged on the Con so lida ted Fund
of the State an d thus are not su bject to th e
annual vote of th e state legi sla ture.
7However, the Cha irma n/ Speaker need not accept
the resignation if he/ she is satisfied that it is not
volunta ry or genuine.

~ 339

Speaker of Assembly
The Spea ker is elected by the assembly itself
fro m a mongst its m embers.
Usually, the Speaker rem a ins in office during th e life of th e assembly. However, he/ sh e
vacates his/h er office ea rlier in a ny of the
following three cases:
1. if h e/ sh e ceases to be a member of the
assembly;
2. if he/ sh e resigns by writing to the deputy
spea ker; and
3. if he/ she is re moved by a resolut io n
passed by a majority of all the then members of the assembly ( i.e., an effective
majority). Such a resolution can be moved
only after giving 14 days advance notice.
The Speaker has the following powers and
duties:
1. He/ she maintains order and decorum in
the asse mbly for conducting its business
and regulating its proceedings. This is
hi s/ h er primary responsibility and he/
sh e has fina l power in this regard.
2. He/ she is the fin al interpreter of the provis ions of (a) the Constitution of Indi a,
(b) the rules of procedure and conduct
of business of assembl y, and (c) the legislative precedents, within the assemblv.
3. He/she adjourns the assembly or suspends
the meeting in the absence of a quorum.
4. He/she does not vote in the first instan ce.
But, he/ sh e can exercise a casti ng vote
in the case of a tie.
5. He/ she can allow a 'secret' sitting of the
House at the request of the leader of the
House.
6. He/ she decides whether a bill is a Money
Bill or not and his/ h er decision on this
question is final.
7. He/ she decides the questions of disqualification of a member of the assembly,
arising on the ground of defection under
the provisions of the Thnth Schedule.
8. He/sh e appoints the chairman of all
th e committees of the asse mbly a nd
superv ises their functioning. He/sh e is
the chairman of the Business Advisory
Co mmittee, th e Rules Com mittee an d
the Ge n era l Purpose Co mmittee.

_________--'---

340

fl!

Indian Polity

Deputy Speaker of Assembly
Like the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker is also
elected by the assembly itse lf from amongst
its members. He l she is c lected afte r the election of the Speaker has taken place.
Like th e Speaker, the Dep u ty Speaker
remains in office usua ll y during the li fe of
the assembly. However, he l she also vacates
his/ her office earlier in any of the following
three cases:
]. if hels he ceases to be a member of th e
assembly;
2. if hels he resigns by wri ti n g to the
speaker; a n d
3. ifhe/ shc is removed by'::l resolution passed
by a majority of all the then members of
the assembly (i.e., an effective majority).
Such H resol utio n can be moved on ly after
giving 14 days' advance notice.
The Deputy Spea ker performs the duties
of the Speake r's office when it is vaca nt. He/
she also acts as the Speaker when the latter is
absent from the sitti ng of assembly. In both
the cases, he/ she h as a ll the powers of the
Speake r.
The Speaker nominates from amongst the
members a panel of cha irman . Anyone of
them ca n preside over t he a sse mbl y in the
absence of the Speake r or the Deputy Speaker.
He/ she 11<Is t he sa me power as the speaker
when so pres iding. He/ she holds office un til
a new pane l of chairman is nominated.

Chairman of Council
The Chairman is elected by t he counc il itself
from amongst its members.
The Chairman vacates h is/ her office in any
of th e fo ll owing three cases:
1. if he/ she ceases to be a member of the
co unc il;
2. if h e/ she resig-ns by writing to th e de puty
chairm a n ; a nd
3. if he / she is removed by a resol u tion
passed by a majo rity of a ll the the n
members of the co un cil (Le., an effective
majority). Such a r(~so ill tion can be moved
on ly after giving 14 days advance notice.

As a presidi ng officer. the power and functions
of the Cha innan in the council are si milar to
those of the Speaker in the assembly. However;
the Speaker has one special power which is not
enjoyed by the Chainnan. The Speaker decides
whether a bi ll is a Money Bill or not and his/
her decision on this question is final

Deputy Chairman of Council
Like the Chairma n , the Deputy Chail-man is
also elected by the co un cil itself from amongst
its members.
T h e dep u ty c hairman vacates hi s/ her
office in any of the fo ll owi ng t h ree cases:
1 . if he/ she ceases to be a m ember of the
counc il ;
2 . if h e /s he resign s by writing to the
Chai rman; and
3. if he/ she is removed by a resolution
passed by a majority of all the then
members of the counc il (i-e., an effective
majority). Such a resol ution can be moved
on ly afte r giving 14 days advance notice.
The Deputy Cha irman performs the duties
of the Cha irman'S office when it is vaca n t.
He/ she a lso acts as th e Chairman wh en the
latter is abse nt from the sitting of the co un cil.
In both t he cases, h e / she has a ll th e powers
of t he Cha irma n.
The Cha irm an nominates from amongst the
members a panel ofvice-chainllan. Anyone of
them ca n preside over the council in the absence
of the Chairma n or the Deputy Chairman _ He/
she has the same powers as the chairman when
so presid ing. He/ she holds office unti l a new
panel of vice-chairman is nominated.

j

SESSIONS OF STATE
LEGISLATURE

Summoning
The gove rnor from time to time sum mons
each House of state legi slature to meet. The
maxi mum gap between the two sessions of
sta te legislature ca nn ot be more than s ix
months, ie, t he stMe leg islature should meet

Stote Legislature

at least twice a year. A sessio n of the state
legisla ture co nsists of many sitti n gs.

Adjo urnm ent
An adjou rnmen t suspe nds th e work in a sitting for a specified tim e wh ich may be hours,
days or weeks .
Adjou rnmen t sine die mea ns termi nating a
sitting of the state legisla ture for a n indefi nite
period . The power of the adjou r nmen t as well
as adjou rnmen t sine die li es with the presid ing
office r of the House.

Proro gatio n
The presid in g office r (Spea ker or Chai rm an )
declar es the House adjo urned sine die, when
the busin ess of the sessio n is co mpl eted.
Withi n the next few days, the gover nor issues
a notifi cation for proro gati on of the sess ion .
However, the govern or can also prorog ue
the House which is in sessio n . Unlik e an
adjou rnm ent, a proro gation termi nates a session of the House.

Disso lution
The legisla tive counci l, being a perma nent
house, is not subject to dissolution. Only the
legislative assembly is subject to di ssolution.
Unlike a prorogation, a dissolution ends the very
life of the existing House, and a n ew House is
consti tuted after the general electio ns are held.
Th e positi on with respec t to laps in g of
bills on th e dissol uti on of the assem bly is
m entio n ed below:
1. A Bill pendi ng in the asse~bly lapses
(whet her origin ating in the assem bly
or transm itted to it by the counc il).
2. A Bill passed by the assembly but pendi ng
in the counc il lapses.
3. A Bill pendi ng in the counc i l but not
passed by the assem bly does not lapse.
4. A Bill passed b y the assem bly (in a
unica meral state) or passe d by both
the house s (in a bica m eral state) but
pendi n g assen t of the gover nor or the
Presid ent does n ot lapse.

~, 341

5. A Bill p ~sse d by the asse mbly (i n a
uni came ral state) or passe d by both
the House s ( in a bicam eral state) but
return ed by the presid ent for reco nsi deratio n of House (s) does not lapse.

Quor um
Quoru m is the minim um number of m ember s
requir ed to be presen t. in the House before it
can transact any busine ss. It is ten memb ers
or one-te nth of the total numb er of members
of the House (i nclud ing the presid ing officer),
which ever is greate r. If there is no quoru m during a meeti ng of the House, it is the duty of the
presid ing officer either to adjou rn the House or
to suspen d the meetin g ~nti l there is a quoru m.

Voting in Hous e
AU matte rs at any sittin g of either House arC?
dec ided by a major ity of votes of the memb ers
presen t and voting excl uding the presid i ng
officer. Only a few matte rs which are specificall y menti oned in the Const itution , requir e
e ither effective maj ority or special major ity,
n ot simpl e major ity. The presid ing office r
( i.e., Speak er in th e case of assem bly or
cha irma n in the case of cou n cil or the perso n acting as such ) does not vote in the fi rst
instan ce, but exe rcises a castin g vote in the
case of an equal ity of votes.

Langu age in State Legis lature
The Const ituti on has declar ed the offici al
la nguag e(s) of the state or Hindi or English,
to be the langu ages for transa cting busin ess
in the state legisla ture. However, the presid ing
office r can permi t a m embe r to address the
House in h is/ her m oth er-ton gue.
The state legisla ture is autho rised to decide
wheth er to contin ue or discon tinue Englis h
as a floor langu age after the comp letion of
fiftee n years from the comm en cemen t of
th e Const itutio n (i .e., from 1965). In case
of Hima chal Prade sh, Manip ur, Megh alaya
and Tripu ra, this time limit is twenty-five
years and that of Arunachal Pradesh , Goa and
Miwr am, it is forty years.

l

342

;/! Indian Polity

Rights of Ministers and Advocate General
fn addition to the me mbers of a House, every
minister a nd the advocate general of the state
have the right to speak a nd take part in th e
proceedings of eithe r House or any of its committees of which he/ she is na med a member,
without being entitled to vote. There are two reasons underlying this con sti tutiona l provision:
1. A minister ca n partic ipa te in the proceedings of a House, of which he l she is not
a membe r.
2 . A mini ster, who is not a me mbe r of either
Hou se, can parti ci pate in th e pro ceedin gs of both the Ho uses8 .

LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE IN
STATE LEGISLATURE
O rdinary Bills
Bill in the Originating House An o rdinary
bill ca n origin a te in either Hou se of th e sta te
le gi sla ture ( in case of a bi cam e ra l legi sla ture). Such a bill can be introdu ced e ith e r by
a minister or by a ny other me mbe r. The bill
pa sses through three stages in th e origi na tin g
House, viz,
1. First reading,
2. Second rea ding, and
3. Third reading.
Afte r th e bill is passed by th e orig inatin g
House, it is tra n smi tted to th e second House
for con sid e ration and passa ge. A bill is
dee med to have bee n passed by the state legi slature only whe n both the Houses have agreed
to it, eith e r with or with out am e ndme n ts. In
case of a uni ca mera l legisla ture, a bill passed
by the legi slati ve asse mbl y is sent directl y to
the gove rnor for hi s/ h e r asse nt.

Bill in the Second House I n th e se cond
Hou se al so, th e bill passes th ro ugh a]J th e
th ree sta ges, tha t is, fi rst reading, second reading and third reading.
SA pe rson ca n remain a mini ster for six months,
withou t be ing a me mber of e ither house of th e sta te

legislature.

When a bill is passed by the legisla tive assembly and transmitted to the legislative council , the
latter has fotlr alternati ves before it:
1. it ma y pass th e bill as se nt by th e
asse mbl y ( Le., without a mendmen ts);
2. it may pa ss the bill with am e ndm ents
and re tur n it to th e asse mbl y for
reco nsiderat ion;
3. it may reject the bill a1togethe r; and
4 . it may not ta ke any action a nd thus keep
th e bill pe nding.
If th e coun c il passes t h e bill without
a m e ndm e n ts or t he asse mbl y accepts th e
am endme nts suggested by th e council, the bill
is deem ed to have bee n passed by both the
Houses and the sam e is se nt to the the gove rno r for hi s/ he r assent. On th e othe r han d,
if the assembly rej ects t he a me ndm e nts suggested by the coun cil or th e coun cil rej ects the
bill altogeth er or the co un cil does not take any
action fo r th ree months, the n th e assembly
may pass the bill again and transmi t t he sam e
to th e coun cil. If the coun cil rejects th e bill
a ga in or pa sses the bin with a me ndme nts not
acceptable to th e asse mbly or does not pass the
bill within o ne month , then the bill is deemed
to have been passed by both t he Houses in th e
form in whi ch it was passed by the assembl y
fo r th e seco nd tim e.
Th ere fore, the ultimate power of passing an
ordin a ry bill is vested in the assembly. At the
most , th e coun c il ca n detain o r de lay the bill
fo r a p e ri od of four mo nths -th ree mon ths
in the first insta nce and on e mo nth in th e
second in sta nce. The Const itu tio n does not
prov ide for th e mechanism of j o int sitting of
bo th the Houses to reso lve the di sagree men t
be tween th e two Houses over a bill. On th e
oth er hand , the re is a provision fo r joint sittin g of the Lok Sabh a a nd t he Raj ya Sabha to
resol ve a di sag ree me n t betwee n the two over
a n ordina ry bill. Moreove r, when a bill , whi ch
ha s originated in th e counci l a nd was se nt to
th e assembl y, is rejected by th e assembl y, t he
bill e nds a nd becom es dea d.
T hus, the coun ci l h as been give n much
lesse r signifi ca nce, positio n and a uthority
th a n that of t he Rajya Sa bha a t the Cen t re.

Stote legislature

Assen t of the Gover nor Every _b ill, after it is
passed by the assem bly or by both the Houses
in case of a bicam eral legisla ture, is presen ted
to the gover nor for his/ her assent . There are
four altern atives before the gover nor:
1. he/ she may give hislhe r assent to the bill;
2. h e/ she may withh old his/ h er assen t to
the bill;
3. h e/ she may return the bill for recon sid·
eratio n of the House or House s; and
4. h e/ she may reserv e the bill for the con·
sidera tion of the Presid ent.
If the gover nor gives his/ her assent to the
biB, the bill becom es an Act and is placed on
the Statute Book. If the governor withholds his/
her assent to the biB, the bill ends and does
not becom e an Act. If the gover nor return s the
bill for recon sidera tion and if the bill is passed
by the House or both the Houses again, with
or witho ut amend ments , and presen ted to the
governor for hislhe r assent, the gover nor must
give his/ her assent to the bill. Thus, the gover·
nor enjoys only a suspens ive veto. The positi on
is same at the Centra l level also.
Assen t of t he Presi dent When a bill is
reserv ed by the gover nor for the consideratio n
of the Presid ent, the Presid ent may either
give his/ h er assen t to the bill or withh old
h is/h er assen t to th e bill or return the bill for
recon sidera tion of the House or House s of the
state legisla ture. When a bill is so return ed,
th e House or House s have to recon sider it
within a period of six month s. The bill is pre·
sented again to the presid ential assen t after
it is passed by the House or House s with or
witho ut amen dmen ts. It is not menti oned in
the Const itutio n wheth er it is obliga tory on
the part of the presid ent to give his/ her assent
to such a bill or not.

Mone y Bills

I

The Const itutio n lays down a specia l procedure for the passin g of Money Bills in the
state legisl ature. This is as follows:
A Mone y Bill canno t be introd uced' in the
legisla tive counc il. It ca n be introd uced in
the legisla tive assem bly only and that too on

21 343

the recom mend ation of the governor. Every
such bill is consi dered to be a gover nmen t
bill and can be introd uced only by a minist er.
After a Mone y Bill is passed by the legislativ e assem bly, it is transm itted to the
legisl ative co un cil for its co nside ration .
The legisla tive counc il has restric ted power s
with regard to a Money Bill. It canno t reject
or amen d a Mone y Bill. It can only make
recom mend ations and must return the bill
to the legisla tive assem bly within 14 days.
The legisla tive assem bly can eith er accep t or
reject all or any of the recom m endat i ons of
the legisla tive counc il.
If the legisl ative assem bly accep ts any
recom mend ation, the bill is then deehl ed
to have been passe d by both the House s in
the modif ied form. If the legisl ative assem bly does not accep t any recom mend ation,
the bill is then deem ed to have been passe d
by both the House s in the form origin ally
passed by the legisl ative assem bly witho ut
any chang e.
If the legisla tive co uncil does not return
the bill to the legisla tive assem bly within
] 4 days, the bill is deem ed to have been
passed by both House s at the expiry of the
sa id period in the form origin ally passed by
the legisla tive assem bly. Thus, the legisla tive
assem bly has more power s than legisla tive
counc il with regard to a mone y bill. At the
most, the legisla tive counc il can deta in or
delay a mone y bill for a period of 14 days.
Finall y, when a Mone y Bill is presen ted to
the governor, he/sh e may either give his/ her
assent , withh old his/ her assent or reserv e the
bill for presid ential assen t but canno t return
the bill for recon sidera tion of the state legislatu re. Norm ally, the gover nor gives his/
her assen t to a mone y bill as it is introd uced
in the state legisla ture with his/ he-r prior
permi ssion.
When a mon ey bill is reserv ed for consid·
eratio n of the Presid ent, the Presid ent may
either give his/ h er assen t to the bill or with·
hold his/ her assen t to the bi11 but canno t
return the bill for recon sidera tion ofthe state
legisla ture.

344

{I

Indian Polity

BILLS RESERVED fOR
PRESIDENT' S CONSIDERATION
The Sa rkar ia Com mi ssion on Ce nt re-S tate
Rela ti ons (1983-88) cla ssified the State Bills
reserved for President's cons ideration under the
Co nstitution in the fo llowing th ree categories:
). Bi ll s wh i ch mu st be reserved for
Preside n t's co ns id e ratio n : I n th is categor y, co me Bil1s(i) wh ich so de rogate from the powers
of the Hi gh Court, as to e nda nger
the pos it ion wh ic h that Co urt is
u nd er the Consti tu t io n des igned
to fill (A rt icle 200) ;
(ii) which relate lO impositio n of taxes
o n water o r e lect ri city in certa in
cases, a nd attract the p rov isio ns of
Arti cl e 288; and
(iii) which fa ll with in Article 360, duri ng
a fin a ncial e me rge ncy.
2. Bills which may be reserved for President's
co nside ra t ion a nd assen t fo r spec ific
p urposes: In th is catego r y, the fo ll ow ing
Bills co m e (i) 1b secure immunity fro m o peration
of Art icles ] 4 an d 19. T hese are
Bill s for-

Ta ble 33.1

(a) ac q uls lllo n of es tates , etc.
(Article 3I A);
(b) giv ing effect to certa in Direct ive P r in ci ples of Sta te Po li cy
(A rt icle 3I G).
(i i) A Bill re lat ing to a s ubject en um e rated in the Concu r rent List,
to ensure o peration o f its prov isio ns d espi te their re p ug nancy to
a Uni on law or an ex istin g law,
by secur in g Pres id ent's asse n t in
term s of Arti cle 254.
(W) A bill imposing restrictio ns on trade
an d co mm erce requ i r ing pr io r
President ia l sa n cti o n wh ich was
n o t ob ta in ed u nder Article 304.
3. Bills which may not specifi cally fall u nder
any of the above categories, yel may be
reserved by the Gove rnor fo r Preside n t's
considerat ion under Article 200.

LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE
COMPARED
A co mparison of the legislatu re p roced ure in
the Parl iament a nd Sta te Legislatu re is give n
in Thblc 33.1.

Comparing Legislative Procedure in the Parliament and State Legislature
Parliament

State Legislature
A. With Regard to Ordinary Bills

1. It can be introduced In either House of the Parliament

1. It can be Introduced in either House of the state
legislature.

2. It ca n be introduced either by a minister or by a
private member.

2. It can be introduced either by a minister or by private
member.

3. It passes through first reading, second reading and
third reading in the originating House.

3. It passes through first reading, second reading and
third reading In the originating House.

4. It Is deemed to have been passed by the Parliament
only when both the Houses have agreed to it, either
with or without amendments.

4. It is deemed to have been passed by the state legis·
lature only when both the Houses have agreed to ii,
eilher with or without amendments.

5. A deadlock between the two Houses takes place
when the second House, after receiving a bill passed
by the first House, rejects the bill or proposes amendments that are not acceptable to the first House or
does not pass the bill within six months.

5. A deadlock between the two Houses takes place
when the legislative council, after receiving a bill
passed by the legislative assembly, rejects the bill or
proposes amendments that are not acceptable to the
legislative assembly or does not pass the bill within
three months.

State Legislature

~ 345

Parliament

State legislature

6. The Constitution provides for the mechanism of joint
sitting of two Houses of the Parliament to resolve a
deadlock between them over the passage of a bill.

6. The Constitution does not provide for the mechanism
of joint sitting of two Houses of the state legislature
to resolve a deadlock between them over the passage of a bill.

-.~. --

7. The Lok Sabha cannot override the Rajya Sabha by
passing the bill for the second time and vice versa.
A JOint sitting Is the only way to resolve a deadlock
between the two Houses.

7. The legislative assembly can override the legislative
council by passing the bill for the second time and
not vice versa. When a bill is passed by the assembly
for the second time and transmitted to the legislative
council, if the legislative council rejects the bill again, Of
proposes amendments that are not acceptable to the
legislative assembly. or does not pass the bill within one
month, then the bill is deemed to have been passed by
both the Houses in the form In which it was passed by
the legislative assembly for the second time.

8. The mechanism of jOint sitting for resolving a deadlock applies to a bill whether originating in the Lok
Sabha or the Rajya Sabha. If a joint Sitting is not summoned by the president, the bill ends and becomes
dead.

8. The mechanism of passing the bill for the second
time to resolve a deadlock applies to a bill originatIng in the legislative assembly only. When a bill,
which has originated in the legislative council and
sent to the legislative assembly, Is rejected by the
latter, the .bill ends and becomes
dead.
.

8. WIth Regard to Money Bills
1. It can be Introduced only in the Lok Sabha and not in
t ~e RaJya Sabha.

1. It can be Introduced only in the legislative assembly
and not in the legislative council.

2. It can be introduced only on the recommendation of
the president.

2. It can be Introduced only on 1he recommendation of
the governor.

3. It can be Introduced only by a minister and not by a
,",,,,p
, ,.ivate member.

3. It can be Introduced only by a minister and not by a
private member.

4. It cannot be rejected or amended by the Rajya
Sabha. 11 should be returned to the lok Sabha within
14 days, either with or without recommendations.

4. It cannot be rejected or amended by the legislative
council. It should be returned to the legislative
assembly within 14 days, either with or without
amendments.

S. The Lok Sabha can either accept or reject aU or any
~~ the re~~mmend_~I?~S of the. RaJya Sa~~a.:..

5. The legislative assembly can either accept or reject all
_ ... .2.r any of the _r:~_~mmendatio-"~f the legisl~tive council.

6. If the lok Sabha accepts any recommendation, the
biN is then deemed to have been passed by both the
Houses In the modified form.

6. If the legislative assembly accepts any recommendation. the bill is then deemed to have been passed by
both the Houses In the modified form.

7. If the Lok Sabha does not accept any recommenda7. If the legislative assembly does not accept any recomtion, the bill is then deemed to have been passed by
mendation, the bitlis then deemed to have been passed
both the Houses in the form originally passed by the
by both the Houses in the form origInally passed by the
_,Lok S.a~a without any. change. . ___ .,......,
.~, _ _ legl~atjVe ~sse mbly without any ~ hange:........
8, If the Rajya Sabha does not return the bill to the lok
Sabha within 14 days, the bill is deemed to have
been passed by both the Houses at the expiration
of the said period in the form originally passed by
the lok Sabha.

8. If the legislative council does not return the bill to
the legislative assembly within 14 days, the bill Is
deemed to have been passed by both the Houses at
the expiration of the said period In the form originally
passed by the legislative assembly.

9. The Constitution does not provide for the resolution
of any deadlock between the two Houses. This is
because, the will of the lok Sabha Is made to prevail
over that of the Rajya Sabha, if the latter does not
agree to the bill passed by the former.

9. The Constitution does not provide for the resolution
of any deadlock between the two Houses. This Is
because, the will of the legislative assembly is made
to prevail over that of legislative council, if the latter
does not agree to the bill passed by the former.

346

,rfJ

Indian Polity

POSITION O F LEGISLATIVE
COUNCIL
The co n stitutiona l position of the co uncil (as
co mpared with the assemb ly) ca n be studied
from two angl es:
A. Sph eres w h ere co un c il is e qu a l to
assembly.
8. Spheres where co un c il is un eq ual to
assembly.

Equal with Assembly
In the fo ll owing matters, the powers and stat us of th e counc il are broadl y equa l to that
of the assemb ly:
1. In troduction and passage of ordinary
bills. However, in case of di sagreement
between the two Houses, the wi1l of the
assembly prevails over that of the council.
2. Approval of ordinances issued by the
gove rnor.
3. Selection of ministers including th e chief
minister. Under the Con stitution the,
mini ste rs in duding the chief minister
ca n be me mbers of e ither House of the
sta te legi slature. However, irrespecti ve of
their me mbership, th ey are responsible
on ly to the assembly.
4. Co nsid eration of the reports of th e co nsti tutional bodies like State Finance
Commiss ion, state publ ic service co mmission a nd Comptroller and Auditor
Ge ne ral of India.
5. Enlargeme nt of the jurisdi ct ion of the
state public service co mmission.

Unequal with Assembly
In the foll owing matters, the powers and
status of the counci l are un equal to that of
the assembly:
1. A Money Bm can be introduce d onl y in
the assembl y a nd not in the co un c il.
2 . The council cannot a mend or reject a
money bill. It shou ld r eturn th e bill
to the assembl y within ]4 days, e ither
with r eco mmendations or without
reco mmendation s.

3 . The assembl y ca n eithe r accept or reject
all or a ny of the recomme ndation of the
council. I n bot h th e cases, the mon ey
bill is deemed to ha ve been pa ssed by
the two Houses.
4. The final power to deci de whether a
particular bill is a money bill or not is
vested in th e Speaker of the assembly.
5. The final power of passi ng an ordinary
bill also li es with the assemb ly. At the
most, the coun cil ca n detai n or delay the
bill for the period of fou r months-th ree
months in the first instan ce an d on e
mon t h in the seco nd in sta n ce. In other
wo rds, the cou n cil is not even a revising
body like th e Raj ya Sabhai it is only a
dilatory c hambe r or an advisory body.
6. The cou nci l ca n o nly di scuss the budget
but can not vote on the demands for
grants (which is the exclus ive priv il ege
of th e assembly).
7. Th e co un c i1 cannot rem ove th e coun cil
of mini sters by passi ng a no-co n fide nce
motion. T hi s is beca use, the coun c il of
mini sters is co ll ecti ve ly respo n si bJe
on ly to the asse mbl y. But, the cou ncil
can di scus and c ritici se t he poli c ies and
activiti es of the Gove rnm e nt.
8 . When a n ord in ary bill , which has orig i.
nated in the co uncil a nd was se nt to the
assembly, is rejec ted by th e assembly,
the bill e nds a nd beco m es dead.
9. T he co un c il does n ot pa rti cipate in the
election of the pres ide nt of India a nd
representatives of the state in t he Raj ya
Sabha.
10. The coun cil has no effective say in the
ratification of a constitutional a mendment
bill. In this respect also , the will of the
9
assembly prevails over that of th e coun ci1 •
9.The position, in this regard, is very well analysed
by J.e. Johari in the foll owing way: 'The Constitution is not clear on this point whether a bill of
constitutional amendment referred to the st.1tes for
ratification by their legislatu res shall include the
Vidha n Pa rishad or not. In practice, it may be understood that the will of the Vidhan Sabha has to prevail
In case the Vidhan Parishad co ncurs wi.th the view of

State Legislature

11. Finally, the very ex isten ce of the council
depends on the will of the assembl y.
The cou n cil ca n be abolish ed by th e
Parliament on the recommendation of
the asse mbly.
From the above, it is clear that the position
of the coun cil vis-a- vis the assembly is much
weaker than the position of th e Raj ya Sabha
vis-a-vis the Lok Sabha. The Rajya Sabha
has equal powers with the Lok Sabha in al1
spheres excep t financial matters and with
regard to the control over the Government.
On the other ha nd , the council is subordinate
to the assembly in all respects, Th us, the
predo min a n ce of the assembly over the
council is fu lly established.
Even though both the cou n cil and the
Rajya Sabha are seco nd chambers, the Co nst itution has given the council much lesser
importance than the Rajya Sabha du e to the
following reaso ns:
] . The Rajya Sabha consists of the representatives of the states and thus reflect the
federal element of the polity. It main ta ins
the federal equilibrium by protecting the
interests of the states against the undue
interference of the Centre. Therefore, it
has to be an effective revising body and
not just an advisory body or dilatory body
like that of the council. On the other
hand, the issue of federal significa nce
does not arise in the case of a council.
2 . The coun cil is heterogeneously co nstituted. It represents different interests
and consists of di ffe rently elected members and also include some nominated
members. Its very composition makes
its position weak and reduces its utility
as an effective revising body. On the
other hand, the Rajya Sabha is homogeneously co nstituted. It represents the
states and union territories and consists
the Vidhan Sabha, it is all right; in case it differs, the
Vidhan Sabha may pass it again and thereby ignore
the will of the Vidhan Parishad as it can do in case
ofa .non-money bill'. (Ind ian Government and Politics,
Vishal, Thirteenth Edition, 2001, p. 441).

~ 347

of mainly elected members (onl y 12 out
of 250 are nominated).
3. The position accorded to the cou ncil is
in accordance with the principles of
democracy. The coun cil should y ield to
the assembl y, which is a popular house.
This pattern of relationship between
th e two Hou ses of the state legislature
is adopted from the British model. In
Britain, the House of Lords (Upper
House) ca nnot oppose and obstruct the
Hou se of Co mmon s ( Lower Hou se).
The House of Lords is only a dilatory
cha mber-it ca n delay a n ordinary bi11
for a maximum period of one year and
a money bill for one month.
Keeping in view its weak, powerless and
insignificant positio n and role, the critics have
described the council as a 'secondary chamber',
'costly ornamental luxury', 'white elephant',
etc. The critics have opined that the cou ncil has
served as a refuge for those who are defeated in
the assembly elections. It enabled the unpopular, rejected and ambitious politicians to occupy
the post of a chief minister or a minister or a
member of the state legislature.
Even though the council has been given
less powers as compared with the assembly, its
utility is supported on the following grounds:
1. It checks the h asty, defective, ca reless
and ill-considered legislation made by
the assembly by m aki ng proviSio n for
revision and thought.
2. It facilitates representation of eminent
professi onals and experts who ca nnot
face direct elections. The governor nominates one-sixth members ofthe council
to provide representation to such people.

PRIVILEGES OF STATE
LEGISLATURE
Privileges of a state legislature are a sum of
special rights, immunities and exemptions
enjoyed by the Houses of state . leg islature,
their committees and their members. They
are n ecessa ry in order to secure the independence an d effectiveness of th eir actions.

348 (! Indian Polity
Without the se pri vileges, the Houses can
neith e r main tain their authority, dignity and
honou r nor ca n protect their members from
any obstruction in the di sc harge of their legislati ve responsibilities.
The Constitution has also extended the privileges of the state legislature to those persons
who are entitled to speak and t.:1ke part in the
proceedings of a House of the state legislature or
any of its committees. These include advocategen era l of the state and state ministers.
It must be clarified here that the privileges
of the state legislature do not extend to the
governor who is also an integra l part of the
state legi slature.
The privileges of a state legislature ca n be
classified into two broad categories-those tha t
are e njoyed by each House of the state legislature collectively, and those that are enjoyed by
the members individua lly.

Collective Privileges
The pri vileges belonging to each House of the
sta te legi slature collect ively are:
1. It ha s the right to publish its reports,
debates and proceedings and also the
right to prohibit others from publishing
the same lO.
2. It can exclude strangers from its proceedings and hold secret Sittings to d iscuss
so me important matters.
3. Jt can make rules to regulate its own procedure and the conduct of its business
a nd to adjudica te upon suc h matters.
4. It ca n punish me mbers a s well as
outsiders tor breach of its privileges or
its contempt by repri mand, admonition
or impri sonm e nt (also suspension or
expU lsion, in case of members).
5. It has the right to receive immediate
inform a ti o n of the arrest, detention,
lll.y-he 44th Amendment Act of ] 978 restored the freedom of the press to publish true reports of sta te
leg islature without its prior perm iss ion. But, this
is not applicabl e in the case of a secret sitting of
the House.

co n vlctlO ll, impri sonment and release
of a member.
6 . It can in stitute inquiries and order the
attendance of witnesses and se nd for
relevant papers and records.
7. The co urts are prohibited to inquire
into the proceedings of a House or its
Com mittees.
8. No person (e ithe r a member or outsider)
can be arrested, and no lega l process
(civil or crim inal) can be served within
the precincts of the House without the
penniss ion of the presiding offi ce r.

Individual Privileges
Th e privil eges bel o nging to the membe rs
individuall y are:
1. They ca nno t be a rrested during the
sess ion of th e state legis lature and
40 days before the beginning and 40
days after the end of such sess io n . This
privil ege is available only in civil cases
and not in criminal cases or preventive
dete ntion cases.
.
2 . They have freedom of speech in the state
leg islature. No mem be r is liable to any
proceedings in any court for anythin g
said or any vote given by him / her in
the state legi slature or its com mittees.
Thi s fre edom is subject to the provisions
of th e Co nstitution and to the rules and
standing o rders regulating th e procedure
of the state legislature ll .
3. They are exempted from ju ry service.
They ca n refuse to give evidence and
appear as a witness in a case pending
in a court when the state legislature is
in sessio n .

II

Article 21 1 of the Constitution says that no discussion shall take place in the legislature of CI state
with respect (0 the conduct of any judge of the
Supreme Court or of a high court in the discharge
of his/ her duties. Under the rules of a House(s) of
the state legislature. usc of un pa rliamenta ry language or unparliamenta ry conduct of a me mber
is prohibited.

State Legislature

~ '349

Strength of l egislative Assemblies and Legislative Councils and seats Reserved for

Table 33.2

SCs.and STs in the Legislative Assemblies
5 No

Name of the
State/Union Territory

Number of Seats In
l egisla tive Assembly

-

I. STATES

II

175

1.

Andhra Pradesh

2.

Arunachal Pradesh

60

3.

Assam

126

4.

Bihar

._- --.-

243

5.

Chhattisgarh

6.

Goa
------~

Gujarat
~

-

40

~-.-

182
90

8. Haryana

•

IW

90

"'---

..•

--

59
8

16

38

2

-

10
1
13

-

---

•
75

29
-~-

27

£l&ac

:J

'=1

.-----

-

3

81

9

28

224

36

15

.... 140

14

2

230

35

47

14. Maharashtra

288

29

25

78

15.

Manlpur

60

19

-~

16. Meghalaya

60

68

10. Jharkhand1
11 .

Karnataka

12.

Kerala

•

.

, , ----

Madhya Pradesh

~-.

~~Mlzor~m

40

18. Nagaland

60

-

•

59

147

24

20.

Punjab

117

34

21.

Rajasthan

200

34

22.

Sikkim

32

12

Tamil Nadu

234

2
»_.
44

2

24. Telangana
25. Trlpura

L 26

Uttarakhand

"",

-:J

--

38

19. Odlsha

I 23.

75

55

-- _.

---.-~--.-.

•

:J

'-'S8 12

7

17

-"

Number of Seats In
Legislative CounCIl

17

9. Himachal Pradesh

~.

I,

Reserved for the
Scheduled Tribes

29

.bC

7.

Reserved for the
Scheduled Castes

--]

33
--~- -

25

119

19

12

""V

60

10

20

70

13

2

..

~

-

-

-. ~

40

I
(Conld.)

l2-rhe An dhra Pradesh Reorgan isation (Am endment) Act, 2015, increased the number of seats in the legislative Council of Andhra Pradesh from 50 to 58.

~~/~nd~~~n~p~O~li~~________________________________________________________
350 ,~

Table 33.3

Articles Related to State Legislature at a Glance

ChaIrman or other person to perform the duties of the office of, or to act as. Chairman

Il Un der the Jammu and K..,shmir Reorganisation Act, 2019, the total number of seats fued for the Legislative
Assemb ly of the Un ion territory of Jammu and Kashmir is 107. But, 24 seats rail in the Pakist..n-occup iedKashmir (PoK). These sea ts are vacant and are not to be taken into account for reckoning the total membership of the Assembly.

State Legislature
Article No

185.

~ "351

SubJect·matter

The Chairman Of the Deputy Chairman not to preside while a resolution for his/her removal from office
is under consideration

186.

Salaries and allowances of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker and the Chairman and Deputy Chairman

187.

Secretariat of State legislature

I

-

Conduct of Business

188.

Oath or affirmation by members

189.

Voting In Houses, power of Houses to act notwithstanding vacancies and quorum

'~~_~.' ._-=1

"lkil

Disqualifications of Members

..

190.

~

Vacation of seats
------~

:/~1.91:-.

-_. ---

~uallflcatlons for membership

--------------]

192.

Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members

193.

. Penalty for Slttlng and voting before making oath or affirmation under Article 188 or when not qual..
fled or when disqualified

-----_.-

------,. , -._--------------_._-----

Powers, Privileges and Immunities of State Legislatures and their Members

,,""

- -,'J

194.

,Powers, privileges, etc.. of the House of Legislatures and of the members and committees thecr""
e~
Of_,",,"

195.

Salaries and allowances of members

. t._

legislative Procedure

...... ,

-

-

-

_....---,-_ _ 0

,

196.

Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills

197.

Restrlctlon on powers of legislative Coundl as to Bills other than Money Bills

--_.

-.

198.

Special procedure in respect of Money Bills

199.

Definition of -Money 8ills"

200.

Assent to 8ills

201.

Bills reserved for consideration

.---~

--~-

,

----

.

-

.

Procedure In Financial Matters

,

--

•

202.

Annual financial statement

203.

Procedure In legislature with respect to estimates

204.

Appropriation Bills

205.

Supplementary. additional or excess grants

206.

Votes on account. Yotes of credit and exceptional grants

207.

Special provisions as to financial Bills

~ ---

,

.

--

-

•

~ ------

.. , ,-,,-

.----- - - -_.~

.~

208.

209.

Rules of procedure

""'L

.....

-.

Procedure Generally

•

Ii

II

Ii

...

Regulation by law of procedure in the l egislature of the state in relation to financial business

,

I
(Contd.}

,(I Indian Pality

352

Article No

2 10.

Subject-matter

Language to be used In the legislature

In the

...........

lsIature

212.

Courts not to Inquire Into proceedings of the Legislature

2 13.

Power of Governor to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Legislature

Table 33.4

51 No

1.

Laws Made by the Parliament (under Article 169 of the Constitution) for the abolition
or creation of State l egislative Councils

Act s

ProvIsion s

West Bengal l egislative Council (Abolition) Act, 1969

Provided for the abolition of the legislative
Council of the Slate of West Bengal.

,.;::;r:;;(AboIi
j;j 1Ion,Act, 1969
3.

ProvIded for

Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council (Abolition) Act, 1985

CouncIl (AboIi1Ion, Act, 1986

5.

Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council Act, 2005

Act, 2010

Provided for the creation of Legislative Council
for the State of Andhra Pradesh.

_tor

for the State of Tllml

~

CHAPliER

34

n the India n single·integrated judicial
system, the high court operates below the
Supreme Court but above the subordinate
courts. The judiciary in a state con sists of a
high court and a hierarchy of subordinate
courts. The high court occupies the top position in the judicial administration of a state.
The institution of high court originated
in India in 1862 when the high courts were
set up at Calcutta, Bombay and Madras l , In
1866, a fourth high court was established at
Allahabad. In the course of time, each province in British India came to have its own
high court. After 1950, a high court ex isting
in a province beca me the high court fo r the
corresponding state.
The Co nstitution of India provides for a
high court for each state, but the Seventh
Amendment Act of 1956 authorised the Parliament to establish a co mmon high court
for two or more states or for two or more
states and a union territory. The territorial
jurisdiction of a high court is co-terminus
with the territory of a state. Similarly, th e
territorial jurisdiction of a common high
court is co-terminus with the territories of
the con cerned states a nd union territory.
At present, there are 25 high courts in the
country2. Out of them, only three high courts

I

'These three high courts were set up under the provisions of the Indian High Courts Act, 1861.
2With the creation of three more new states in
2000, the number of high courts increased from
18 to 21. Again, with the creation of separate high
courts for the three north-eastern states of Manipur,

High Court

have jurisdiction over more than one state.
Among the eight union territories, Delhi alone
has a separate high court (since 1966). The
union territories of Jammu and Kashmir and
Ladakh have a common high court. The othe r
union territories fall under the jurisdiction of
different state high courts. The Parliament ca n
extend the jurisdiction of a high court to a ny
union territory or excl ude the jurisdiction of
a high court from any union territory.
Th e name, year of establishment, territorial jurisdiction and seat (with bench or
benches) of all the 25 high courts are ·mentioned in Thble 34.1.
Articles 214 to 231, in Part VI ofthe Constitution, deal with the orga nisation, independen ce, jurisdiction , powers, procedures and
so on of the high courts.

j

COMPOSITION AND
APPOINTMENT

Every high court (whether exclusive or common) consists of a chief justice and such
other judges as the President may from time
to time deem necessary to appoint. Thus, the
Constitution does not specify the strength of
a high court and leaves it to the discretion
of the President. Accordingly, the President
dete rmines the strength of a high court from
time to time depending upon its workload.
Meghalaya and nipura in 2013, the number of high
courts increased from 21 to 24. further, with the
establishment of a separate high court for the state
of Andhra Pradesh in 2019, the number of high
courts increased from 24 to 25.

354

,i1'

Indian ParII)'

Appointment of Judges The judges of a hi gh
court are appointed by the Preside nt. The chi ef
justice is appointed by the President after co nsultation with the chief justice of India and the
governor of the state co ncern ed. For appointment of other judges, the chief justice of the
co ncerned high court is a lso co nsulted. In case
ofa co mmon h igh court for two or more states,
the governors of a ll t he states conce rned are
co nsul ted by the President.
In the Seco lld Judges case J ( 1993), the
Su preme Co urt rul ed t hat no a ppointm e nt
of a j udge of the hi gh cou rt can be made,
unl ess it is in confo rmity with the opinion of
the c hief just ice of Indi a. In the Third Judges
casc 4 ( 1998), the Supre m e Co urt opined that
in case of the appointm e nt of high co urt
judges, the c hi e f justice of India should co nsu.lt a co ll egium of two sen ior-m ost judges of
the Supreme Court . Thus, the sole o'p in io n
of the chi ef just ice of Indi a a lo ne does not
co n stitute th e 'consultation' process.
The 99th Co nstitutional Amendment Act of
2014 and the National Judi cial Appointments
Commi ssion Act of 2014 have rep la ced the
Co ll eg ium System of a ppo intin g judges to t he
Supreme Court and High Courts with a new
body ca lled th e National Judicia l Appointments Co mmiss ion (NJAC). However, in 201 5,
the Sup reme Court has decla red both th e
99th Co n stitutiona l Amendment as we ll as
the NJAC Act as un constitut iona l and vo id.
Co nseq uentl y, the earlier collegium syste m
became operative again. This ve rdi c t was
deli ve red by t he Suprem e Court in the Fourth
Judges case4a (20 15). The Court opined tha t
the new system (i.e., NJAC) would affect the
indep enden ce of the judi ciary.
]SlIpreme COllrt Aduocates- oll - Record Associatioll VS.
Unioll of fndia ( 1993).
4[n re I)res ide ntia l Reference ( 1998). The Pres iden t

sought the Supreme Court's opinion (under Article
143) on certa in doubts over the consu ltation process to be adopted by the chi ef justice or India as
stipulated in the 1993 case.

-IaSllpreme Cou rt Advocates- oil-Record Association vs.
Ull ion of Ind;{/. (2015).

QUALIFICATIONS, OATH
AND SALARIES
Qualifications of Judges A person to be
appoin ted as a judge of a high co urt, should
have the following qualiJications:
1. He/ she should be a cit izen of Indi a.
Z. (a) He/ she should have he ld a judicial
office in t he terri tory of Indi a for
ten years; or
(b) He/ she should have bee n a n advocate
of a high court (o r high co urts in
succession) for ten years.
From the above, it is clear that the Co nst itution ha s not presc ribed a minimum age
for a ppointm e nt as a judge o f a high co urt.
Moreover, unlike in the case of the Supreme
Co urt, the Co nsitution makes no provis ion
for the appoi ntm en t of a dist i nguished jurist
as a judge of a high cou rt.
Oath or Affirmation A perso n appointed as
a judge of a high court, be fore entering upon
h is/ her office, has to ma ke a nd subscrib e to
a n oath or affirmation before the gove rnor of
the state or some person ap pointed by him!
he r for this purpose. in his/ h er oath, a judge
of a high cou rt swears:
.1. to bea r true fait h an d a llegiance to the
Co nst itu tion of Indi a;
2. to uphold the sove reignty a nd integrity
of Indi a;
3. to dul y a nd faithfully and to the best of
his/ h e r ability, knowl edge and judgeme nt pe rfonn the duti es of the office
without fear or favo ur, affection or illwi1l ; and
4. to uphold the Constitution and the laws.
Salaries and Allowances T he salaries, allowa nces, privil eges, leave a nd pe nsion of the
judges of a high co urt a re determined from
tim e to time by the Pa rliament. They can·
no t be va ri ed to t he ir di sa dvantage afte r
their a ppointment except during a financ ia l
emergency. In 201 8, the sa lary of the c h ief
justice was in creased from f90,OOO to 2.50 lakh
per month a nd that of a judge from fSO,OOO

High ( ourt

to 2.25 lakh per monthS, They a TC also paid
sumptuary allowan ce and provided with free
accommodation and other facilities like medical, car, telephone, etc.
The retired chi ef justice and judges a re
entitl ed to 50% of their last drawn sa lary as
m onthl y pension .

j TENURE,
REMOVAL
AND TRANSFER

)

Tenure of Judges Th e Con stitutio n h as not
f ixed th e tenure of a judge of a high court.
Howeve r, it makes the followin g fou r provisions in this rega rd:
1. Helshe holds office until hel sh e atta ins
th e age of 62 yea rs 6 , An y qu estion s
rega rding his/ her age is to be decided by
the President after consultation with the
chief justice of India and the deci sion of
the President is fin al.
2. Helsh e can resign hi s/h er office by writing to the Pres ident.
3. He/ sh e ca n be removed fro m hi s/ h er
office by the President on the recomm endation of th e Parliament.
4 . He/ sh e vacate s hi s/ h er offi ce wh en
h e/she is appoin ted as a judge of th e
Suprem e Court or wh en h e/ she is transferred to a nother h igh court.

Removal of Judges A judge of a high court
ca n be removed from hi s/ her offi ce by an
order of the President. The President can issue
the Temoval order only after an address by the
Parliament has been presented to him / her in
the sam e session for such rem oval. The address
Sin 1950, their sala ri es were fixed at ~4,OOO per

month and ~3,50 0 pe r m onth respectively. In 1986 ,
their salaries were ra ised to ~9 ,OOO per month a nd
~8,OOO per month respectively. In 1998, thei r salaries were ra ised to ~30,O OO per month a nd f26,O OO
per month respectively. In 2009, their salari es were
raisea to l'90,OOOper month a nd ~80 ,OOO pe r month
respectively.
"The retirement age has been raised from 60 to
62 years by the 15th Amendment Act of ]963.

~ 355

must be supported by a special majority of each
House of Parliam ent (Le., a majority of the
total membership of that House and majority
of n ot less than tW0-'thi rds of the members of
that Hou se present and voting). The grounds
for removal are two-proved misbehaviour or
in capacity. Thus, a j udge of a high court ca t1
be removed in the same manner and on the
sam e grounds as a judge of the Supreme Court.
The Judges Enquiry Act (1968) regul ates the
procedure relating to the removal of a judge of'
a high court by the process of impeachm ent:
1 . A remova l motion sign ed by 100 members
(in th e case of Lok Sabha ) or 50 m embers ( in th e case of Raj ya Sabha) is to
be given to th e Spea ker/ Chairma n.
2. The Speaker/Chai r man m ay admit th e
motio n o r refuse to admit it.
3. If it is admitted , the n th e Speaker!
Chairman is to constitilte a three-member
committee to investi gate into the charges.
4 . Th e committee should consist of (a) th e
chi ef justi ce or a judge of th e Suprem e
Court, (b) chi ef justi ce of a high cou rt,
and (c) a di stin gui sh ed jurist.
S. ' If th e committee finds th e judge to be
guilty of misbehav iour or sufferin g from
an incapaci ty, the House can take up the
consideration of th e moti on .
6. After the motion is passed by each House
of Parlia ment by a speci al m ajority, a n
address is presented to the Pres ident for
re moval of th e judge.
7. Finall y, the Presiden t passes an order
removing th e judge.
Fro m th e above, it is clea r th at the procedu re for th e impeachm ent of a judge of a
high court is th e sa me as that for a judge of
the Sup rem e Court.
It is interesting to know that no judge of a
high co urt ha s been impeach ed so far.
Transfer of Judges Th e Presiden t can transfer
a judge from on e hi gh court to an other afte r
consul ting the Chi ef Justi ce of India. On transfe r, he/ she is entitled to receive in addition to
his/her sala ry such co mpensatory allowa nce
as may be determ in ed by Pa rli amen t.

356 "It1'lndion Polity
In 1977, the Supre me Court rul ed that th e
transfe r of hi gh co urt judge s co uld be resort ed
to only as an excep tional measu re and o nly
in publi c intere st a nd n ot by way of punis hment. Agai n in 1994, the Supre me Cou rt held
that judi cial rev iew is necess a ry to check
a rbitra riness in transf er of judges. But, o nl y
the judge who is tran sferre d ca n challe nge it.
In the Third Judges case ( 1998), the Supre me
Co urt opine d th at in case of th e transfer of
high court j udges, th e Chief Justic e of India
should co nsu lt, in addition to the collegium of
fou r se niorm ost judges of the Supre me Court,
the chi ef justice of th e two h igh cou rts (o ne
from which the j udge is being transf erred and
the other receiv ing hi m/ her). Thus, the sole
opinio n of th e chi ef justic e of India does not
co nstitu te the 'consu ltatio n ' process.

ACT ING, ADD ITIO NAL
AND RETIRED JUDGES
Actin g Chief Justic e The Presi de nt ca n
appo int a judge of a high court ilS an acting
chi ef justic e of the high co urt when:
1. the office of chief justice of the high co urt
is vaca n t; or
2. th e chi ef justi ce of th e high co urt is temporar ily abse nt; or
3. the chi ef justice of the high court is unable
to perfor m the duties of h is/ her office.
Addit ional and Actin g Judge s The Presid ent
ca n appoi nt duly qual ifi ed person s as addition a1 judges of a high court for a tempo rary
period not exceedi ng two years when:
1. there is a tempo rary increa se in the busin ess of the hi gh court; or
2. th ere are arrear s of work in the high
court.
Th e Presid ent ca n also appoi nt a dul y
qualif ied perso n as an acting judge ofa high
court when a judge of that h igh court (other
than th e chief justic e) is:
1. unabl e to perfor m the duties of his/ h er
office du e to abse nce or a ny oth er reason; or
2. appo inted to act te mpora rily as chi ef
j ustice of that hi gh court.

An acting judge holds office un til the permane ntjudg e resumes his/ her office. However,
both the additi ona l or acti ng judge ca nnot
hold office afte r attain ing the age of 62 years.
Retire d Judge s At any tim e, th e chief justice of a hi gh co urt o f a state ca n reque st a
retired j udge of th at high co urt or any other
high cou rt to act as a judge of th e high court
of that sta te for a te mpora ry period . He/ she
ca n do so o nly with the prev ious co nsent of
the Pres ident and also of th e perso n to be so
ap poi nted. Suc h a judge is entitl ed to such
a llowan ces as the Pres ident may determ in e.
He/ she wi ll al so enjoy all the jurisd ictio n,
power s a nd pri vil eges of a judge of that hi gh
court. But, he/ sh e wi ll not otherw ise be
dee med to be a judge of tha t high court.

t INDEPENDENCE OF HIGH COURT
The inde pende nce of a hi gh co urt is very
esse nti a l for th e effect ive disc harge of the
duties ass igned to it. It should be free fro m
the en croach m ents, press ures and in terfere nces of the execu t ive (coun cil of mini sters)
.l nd the leg islatu re. 1t shoul d be allowed to do
justic e witho ut fear o r favour.
The Constitutio n has made the fo ll owi ng
provis ions to safegu ard a nd ensure the in depende n t a nd impar t ial fun ct ion ing of a hi gh
co urt.

1. Mode of Appo intme nt The judge s of a
high court are a pp o inted by the Presid ent
( whi ch m ea ns the ca bin et) in consu ltatio n
wit h th e memb e rs of the j udicia ry itse lf
( i.e., chi ef j ust ice o f Indi a and the ch ief
j usti ce of th e hi gh co urt ). Th is provis ion
curta ils the abso lu te di sc ret ion of th e executi ve as we ll as ensu res that the judic ia l
appoi ntmen ts are not based on a ny politi ca l
or pra ctical con s iderat i o n s.
2 . Security of Tenure The judges of a high
court are provid ed with the securi ty of tenure.
They ca n be remov ed from office by the President o nly in the mann er and on the groun ds
men tio n ed in the Co nstitu tion . This mea ns
tha t they do not hold their office durin g the

High Court

pl easure of the Preside nt, though they a rc
appointed by him / her. Thi s is obvious from
the fa ct that no judge of a high court h as bee n
removed (or impeached) so far.

3. Fixed Service Conditions The salaries, al·

)

lowances, pri vil eges, leave and pension of the
judges of a high co urt are determined from
ti"me to time by the Parliament. But, they
cannot be changed to their disadvantage after
their appo intm e nt except during a financial
emergency. Thu s, the conditions of serv ice of
the judges of a hi gh court re ma in same during their te rm of office.

4. Expenses Charged on Consolidated Fund

The sa la ries and a ll owances of the judges, the
salaries, allowances and pe nsio ns of the staff
as wen as the admini strative exp en ses of a
high court are charged on the con soli dated
fund of the state. Thus, they are non·votable by
the sta te legislature (though th ey ca n be discussed by it). It should be noted here that the
pen sion ofa high cou rt judge is cha rged on the
Consolidated Fund of India a nd not the state.

5. Conduct of Judges cannot be Discussed

Th e Constituti o n prohibits any di scussio n
in Parliament or in a state leg islature with
respect to the co ndu ct of the judges of a high
court in the di scharge of th e ir duties, exce pt
whe n a n impeach me nt mot ion is unde r co nside ration of the Pa rliament.

6. Ban on Practice after Retirement The

retired perman e nt judges of a high co urt are
prohibi ted from pleading or acting in a ny
court or before any autho ri ty in india except
the Supre me Court and th e other high courts.
Thi s e n sures that they do not favour a nyo ne
in the hope of future favour.

7. Power to Punish for its Contempt A
high court ca n punish any person for its
conte mpt. T hu s, its actions and dec is ion s
ca nn ot be criti cised and opposed by a ny·
body. This powe r is vested in a high court to
m aintai n its a uthority, dignity and h o nour.
8. Freedom to Appoint its Staff The c hief

justice of a high court ca n appo int office rs
and serva nts of the hi gh court without any

21 357

inte rfe re n ce from th e executive. He / sh e ca n
also prescribe their co ndition s of se rvice.

9. Its Jurisdiction cannot be Curtailed The
jurisdiction a nd powe rs of a high co urt in so
far as th ey are sp ec ified in the Constitution
ca nnot be curta il ed bo th by the Parliament
and th e sta te leg islature.

JURISDICTION AND POWERS
OF HIGH COURT
Like the Supre me Court, the high court has
been vested with quite extensive and effective
powers. It is the highest co urt of a ppeal in the
sta te. It is the protector of the Fundamental
Ri ghts of the citize n s. it is vested with th e
power to inte rp ret the Con st itu tion . Besides,
it has supe rvisory a nd con sultative roles.
However, the Constitution does not co ntain
deta iled provisions with rega rd to th e jurisdjction a nd powe rs of a high court. It on ly lays
down that the jurisdict ion a nd powers of a
high court are to be the same as immediately
before the co mmencem e nt of the Co nstitutio n . But, there is one addition , that is, the
Const itution gives a high court jurisdi ction
ove r revenue matters (wh ich it did not e njoy
in the pre·co nst itution era). The Co nstitution also co nfe rs (by other provisions) some
more additional powers o n a high court like
writ jurisdiction, power of su perinte ndence,
co nsultative powe r, etc.
At present, a hi gh court e njoys th e following jurisdiction a nd powers:
1. Origina l jurisdicti o n .
2. Writ jurisdi ction.
3. Appellate jurisdiction .
4. Supervisory jurisdiction.
5 . Control over subordina te courts.
6. A court of record.
7. Power of judicial rev iew.
The prese nt jurisdiction a nd powers of a
high court a re governed by (a) the con stitutional prov isions, (b) the Letters Patent, (c)
the Acts of Parliament, (d) the Acts of Sta te
Leg islature, (e) Indian Pena l Code, 1860, (I)
Cirminal Procedure Code, 1973, and (g) Civil
Procedure Code, 1908.

358 ,rjJ Indian Polity

II IOriginal Jurisdict ion
It mean s the power of a h ig h court to hear
di sputes in the fi rst in sta nce, not by way of
a ppeal. It exte nds to the follow in g:
(a) Disputes relating to the elect ion of me mbers of Pari iam ellt and sta te leg islatures.
(b) Regardin g re ven ue matter or a n ac t
ordered or don e in reven ue co ll ec tion.
(c) Enforce ment of funda mentill rights of
c it izens.
(d) Ca ses ordered to be transfe rred fro m a
subordinilte cou rt invo lvi ng t he interpretcltion of the Const itut io n to its ow n fil e.
(e ) The four h ig h cou rts ( i.e., Calcutta,
Bombay, Madras a nti De lh i High Co urts)
have original civ il jurisdiction in C<lses
of higher va lu e.
Before 1973, th e Calcu tta , Bom bay a nd
Madras Hi gh Co urts a lso had orig in al cr im inal jurisdi ction. Bu t, thi s was fu ll y abo lished
by th e Cri min al Procedure Code, 1973.

ti lWrit Jurisdiction
Article 226 of the Constitutio n e mpowers a
hi gh court to issue wT its in clud ing habeas
corpus, mandalllus, certiora ri, prohi bitio n a nd
quo warranto for the e nfo rceme nt of the fundame nta l righ ts of the ci tizens and for a ny othe r
pu rpose. T he phrase 'fo r any oth er purpose'
refers to t he e n forceme nt of an ordinary lega l
right. The hi gh court can issue writs to any
person, authority and gove rnm e nt not o nly
wit hin its territoria l jurisdict ion but a lso o utsi de its territoria l jurisdiction if t he cause of
7
action arises within its territorial j urisdi ction •
T he wr it j uri sdi ctio n of the high court
(under Article 226) is not excl usive but concurrent with the writ jurisdi ction of th e Suprem e
CO lirt ( under Articl e 32). It mean s, whe n the
fundame nta l rights of a citi ze n are violated,
th e aggr ieved party ha s the option of movin g
e ithe r the high court or the Suprem e Court
directl y. Howeve r, the wr it jurisd iction of th e
high CO UI·t is wider than tha t of th e Supre me
7T he seco nd provis io n WilS added by the 15th Const i·
tutio na l A mend me nt Act o r 1963.

Cou rt. Thi s is because, th e Supre me Court can
issue wr its only for the en forcc mc nt of fundame ntal rights and not for any othe r purpose,
that is, it docs not exte nd to :1 case whc re the
breach of an ordin ary legal right is a ll eged.
In the ClulIldm Kumar c<l sell ( 1997), the
Su preme Co urt ruled that the wri t j urisdi ctio n
of bot h the h igh cou rt an d the Su prem e Co urt
cons titute '::1 pa n of t he ba s ic structure of t he
Co nstitution. 1·le nce, it ca nn ot be ousted or
excluded even by way of a n am e ndm e nt to
the Co nstit uti on.

II IAppellate Jurisdiction
A high co urt is primar ily a court ofappeal. lt
hears a ppca Is aga i nst the j udgc me n ts of su bordinate courts fun ctio ni ng in its terr itoria l
jurisdictio n . It ha s appellate jurisd ict ion i n
both civil a nd crimi na l matters. I·fence, the
a ppe ll ate jurisd icti on of a high co urt is wider
than its original jurisd ictio n .
(a) Civil Matters The civ il appe Jl ate jurisdicti o n of a hi gh co urt is as fo ll ows:
(i) First appeals from the orders a nd judgements of t he di stri ct co urts, a dditional
di strict courts a nd other subordinate
courts lie d irectly to the hi gh co urt, on
bot h qu estion s of la w and fact , if the
amount exceeds th e stipu lated lim i t.
( i i) Seco nd a ppeals from the orde rs a n d
j udge ments of th e distri ct court or other
subord inate co urts l ie to the high court
in the cases invo lvin g questions of law
onl y (and not qu es tion s of fa ct).
(iii) Some High Courts have provision for
int ra-cou rt ap p ea ls. When a si n gle
judge of t he high court ha s dec ided a
case (c ither unde r the original o r appellate jurisdi ction of th e high cou rt), .111
appea l from such a decis ion li es to the
di vision ben ch of the sa me hi gh court.
(iv) Appea ls from the decisions of the adm inistrati ve and othe r tribunal s li e to t he
d ivisio n be nch of the state high court.
In 1997, the Supremc Cour t rul e d
Rt. Clw/Ulm Kill/ill/" vs. VI/iQII of lllliia ( 1997).

,

High Court

that the tribunals are subject to the
writ jurisdiction of the high co urts.
Co nsequentl y, it is not possible for
an ' aggrieved person to approach the
Supreme Court directly against the
decisions of the tribunals, without first
going to the high courts.
(b) Criminal Matters The criminal appellate
jurisdiction of a high court is as fol1ows:
(i) Appeals from the judgements of sessions
co urt and additional sessions court lie
to the high court if the sentence is one
of imprisonment for more than seven
years. It should also be noted here that
a death sente'n ce (popuJar1 y known as
cap ital punishment) awarded by a sess ions court or an additional sessions
court should be confirmed by the high
court before it ca n be executed, whether
there is an appeal by the convicted person or not.
(H) In some cases specifi ed in various provisions of the Crimina l Procedure Code
(1973), the appeals from the judgements
of the assistant sessions judge, m et ropolitan magistrate or other mag istrates
Uudjcial) li e to the hi gh court.

,
Supervisory Jurisdiction

III

A high court has the power of superintendence over al1 cou rts and tribunal s function ing in its territorial jurisdiction (except
milita ry courts or tribunals). Thus, it m ay(a) cal l for returns from them;
(b) make and issue, general rules and prescribe forms for regul ati ng the practice
and proceedings of them;
(c) prescribe forms in which books, entries
and accounts are to be kept by them;
and
Cd) settle the fees payable to the sheriff,
clerks, officers and lega l practitioners
of them.
This power of superintendence of a high
court is very broad because, (i) it extends
to all co urts and tribunals whether they are
subject to the appel1ate jurisdiction of the

~ 359

high co urt or not; (ii) it covers not on ly
administrative supe rintendence but also judicial superintendence; (iii) it is a revisional
jurisdiction; and (iv) it ca n be suo-mOh4 (o n
its own) and not n ecessaril y on the application of a party.
However, thi s power does not vest the high
court with any unlimited a uthority over the
subordinate courts and tribunals. It is an
ext rao rdinary power a nd hence h as to be
used most spa ringly and only in appropriate cases. Usual1y, it is limited to , (i) excess
of jurisdiction, (ii) gross violation of natural
j ustice, ( iii) error of law, (iv) disregard to the
law of superior courts, (v) perverse findings,
and (vi) m a nifest inj ustice.

iii IControl over Subordinate Courts
In addition to its appell ate jurisdiction and
supervisory jurisdiction over the subordinate
courts as mentioned above, a high court has
a n administrative co ntrol a nd other powers
over them. These include the following:
(a) It is consulted by the governor in the
matters of ap pointment, posting an d
promotion of distri ct judges and in the
appointments of persons to the judicial
service of the state (other than di stri ct
judges).
(b) It deals with the matters or posting, pro·
motio n, grant of leave, transfers and
discipline of the members of the judicial
service of the sta te (oth er than di strict
judges).
(c) It can withdraw a case pending in a
subordinate court if it involves a sub·
sta ntial question of law that require
the interpretation of the Constitution.
It can then either dispose of the case
itself or determine the question of law
and return the case to the subordinate
court with its judgement.
(d) Its law is binding on all subordinate
courts fun ctioning within its territorial
jurisdiction in the sa me sense as the law
declared by the Suprc11l.e .Court is bindin g on all courts in 'rnd ia:--

360 ~ Indian Polity

I'll A Court of Record
As a court of record, il high court has two
powe rs:
(a) The judgements, proceedings and a cts
of the high courts are recorded for pe rpetual memory and testimo ny. These
records arc admi tted to be of evide ntiary
valu e and ca nnot be quest ion ed wh en
produ ced before any subordinate court.
They arc recognised as lega l precedents
and legal references.
(b) It ha s power to punish for co nte mpt of
itself.
T he express ion 'co nte mpt of court' has
not been defined by the Co nst itution. However, the ex pression has been defined by t he
Contempt of Courts Act of 197 1. Under thi s,
conte mpt of court may be c ivil or criminal.
According to t hi s Act, a Hi gh Court has
power to punish for contc mpt of no t only
ilselfbut also contempt of subordinate courts.
Howevcr, no High Court shall take cognil.ancc
of a co nte mpt alleged to have been committed
in respect of a subordinate court, where such
conte mpt is an offence punishabl e under the
Indian Penal Code, 1860.
As a court of record, a high court a lso
ha s the power to review a nd correct its ow n
judgem ent or order or dec ision, eve n though
no specific power of rev iew is conferred on
it by the Constitut io n . Th e Supreme Co urt,
on the other hand, ha s bee n specifi ca ll y
Table 34.1

co nfe rred with the power o f rev iew by th e
co nstitution.

fl lPower of Judicial Review
Judicial review is the power of a high court
to examin e the co nstituti o nality of legislati ve
enactments and executive orde rs of both the
Ce ntral an d state gove rn me nts. On examination, if they a re found to be violative of t he
Con stitution (ultra-vires), they ca n be declared
as ill egal, unconstitutional and invalid (null
and void) by the high court. Co nsequentl y,
th ey ca nnot be enfo rced by the governm ent.
Though the phrase 'judicia l review' hns no
where bee n used in the Consti tution, the provisions of Articles 13 and ZZ6 e.x plicitly confer the
power of judicial rev iew on a high court. The
const itutional va lid ity of a legislative enactment or an executive order cn n be challenged
in a hi gh court on the following three grounds:
(a) it infr inges t h e fundam e ntal ri ghts
( Part III) .
(b) it is outside the compete nce of the au thority which ha s framed it, and
( c) it is repugl1ant to th e co nst itu tional
provisions.
The 4Znd Amendment Act of 1976 cunail ed
th e judic ial review power of h1gh court. It
debarred the hi gh cou rts from con s idering
th e con stitutional validity of an y ce ntral law.
However, the 43rd Amcndment Act of 1977
restored the original pos ition.

Name and Jurisdiction of High Courts

Nclme

Year of

Terntorlal JUriSdiction

Seat

1866

Uttar Pradesh

Prayagraj (Allahabad) (Bench at
Lucknow)

2019

Andhra Pradesh

Arne,....

3. Bombay9

1862

Maharashtra, Goa and Dadra and
Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu

Mumbal (Benches at Nagpur,
Panaji and Aurangabad)

.0

lee2

_ , Bengal and Andaman and

_
(ClraJIt IIonc:hOS aI
uri)
BlaIr and JII

establishment

1.

2.

Allahabad

--'

Nlcobar Islands

¥

!' Though the na mcs of Bombay, Cal cutta and Mad ras arc changed to Mu mbai, Ko1kata and Chcnnai respcctlvely, the namcs of respective high courts arc not chan gcd.

High Cou"
Name

Year of
establishment

Seat

-, -

5. Chhattisgarh

2000

Chhattisgarh

BUaspur

6. Deihl

1966

NCT of Deihl

New Delhi

7.

1948 10

Assam, Nagaland. Mizoram and

Gauhati (Benches at Kohima,

Arunachal Pradesh

Al zawl and Itanaga r)

Ahmedabad

Gauhati

8. Gujetat

1960

Gujarat

9.

Himachal Pradesh

1971

Himachal Pradesh

10. Jammu and Kashmir
& Ladakh 1 !

1928

Jammu and Kashmir & l adakh

Srlnagar and Jammu

11 . Jharkhand

2000

Jharkhand

Ranchi

12. Karnataka

1884 12

Karnataka

Bengaluru (Benches at Oharwad
and Gulbarga)

13. Kera'a

1956

Kerala and Lakshadweep

Ernakulam

14. Madhya Pradesh

1956

Madhya Pradesh

Jabalpur (Benches at Gwallor and
Indore)

1862

Tamil Nadu and Puducherry

Chennai (Bench at Madural)

201 3

Manlpur

Imphal

15. Madras 9

~M8niPur

ft" "

.

•

Shimla

.,.~-.

17. Meghalaya

20 13

18. Orlsse u

1948

19. Patna
20. Punjab and

... -

Meghalaya

_.

Shillong

Odisha

Cuttack

1916

Bihar

Patna

1947

Punjab, Haryana and Chandlgarh

Chandigarh

21. Raj asthan

1949

Rajasthan

Jodhpur {Bench at Jaipurj

22. Sikklm

1975

Slkklm

Gangtok

23. Telangana IS

1954

Telangana

24. Trlpura

20 13

Tripura

Agan ala

25. Uttarak ha nd

2000

Uttarakhand

Nainltal

Haryana U

,

Territorial JUrisdiction

21 361

Hyderabad

-" ,

-"

IOOriginally known as Assa m Hi gh Court a n d rena m ed Gauhati High Court in 19 71.
11 0 rigina lly known as the High Court of Ja m m u and Kashm ir a nd renamed as t he H igh Court of Jam m u a nd
Kashmir f:t Ladakh in 2021.
120riginally known as Mysore High Cou rt a nd ren amed Karnataka High Cou rt in 1973.
13.y-hough the name of Orissa is cb a nged to Odisha, th e na me o f Orissa High Court is n ot ch a nged .
1-40riginaUy known as Punjab High Cou rt and renaml".d Punjab an d Haryana High Court in 1966.
150 riginall y known as An dhra Pradesh High Court (establish ed in 1954). In 2014, it was ren a m ed as the - High
Court of Judicature at H yde rabad~ and was made a com m on high court fo r the states of Andhra Pradesh and
Thlangana. Again, with the establishment of a separate high court for the sta te of An dhra Pradesh in 201 9,
it became the high court fo r the state ofTelanga na.

362 ,~ Indian Polity
Table 34.2
A rtIcle No

A rticles Related to Hig h Courts at a Gla nce
Subject Matter

2 14.

High Courts for states

215.

HIgI1 Courts IItbo courts aI record

2 16.

Constitution of High Courts

21 7,

AppoIIItn.... iInd conditions of the oflIce ala JUdge of a High Court

2 18.

Application of certain provisions relating to Supreme Court to High court~
s _ _""""_~~,...-::I

219,

0eIII "'~ by

220.

Restriction on practice after being a permanent Judge

ofHIg/I Courts

221.
222.

Transfer of a Judge from one High Court to another

223.

224.

Appointment of additional and acting judges

224A.

Appo/nIment o f ' - jUdges at sittings of High Courts

225.

Jurisdiction of existing High Courts

226.

Power aI HIgh Courts to Issue certaIn_

226A.

Constitutional validity of Central laws not to be considered In proceedings under Article 226
(Repealed)

227. _ _ Power of oopedntendence over all courts by the High Court
228.

Transfer of certain cases to Hig h Court

228A.

SpecIal _ I ons as to disposal of quest10ns relating to con'tiMlonal validity of.",. law
(Repoaled)

229.

Officers and servants and the expenses of High Courts

230.

ExtensIon of jurlsdldlon of High Courts to union terrltol1es

23 1.

Establishment of a common High Court for two or more states

232.

Subordinate Courts

he state judiciary consists of a hi gh
court and a hi erarchy of subordina te
courts, also known as lower cou rts.
The subordin ate courts a rc so-called beca use
of their subordination to the state hi gh co urt.
They fun ction below a nd under the high court
at di strict and lower levels.

T

~ CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
Articles 233 to 237 in Part VI of the Con stitution make the [ol1owi ng provisions to regulate
the organisation of subordinate courts and to
ensure their independence from the executive l .

1. A ppo intme n t of Dis t rict J ud ges The
appointment, posting and prom otio n of
district judges in a state arc made by the
governor of the state in co nsultation with
the high court.
A person to be appointed as a di strict judge
should h ave the foll owing qua lifi cations:
(3) He/she should not already be in {he service ofthe Central or the state government.
(b) He/she should have been an advocate or
a pleader for seven years.
(c) He/she sh ou ld be reco mme nded by the
high court for appoin tmen t.
2. Appointment of other J udges Appointment
of person s (other than district judges) to the
judicial serv ice of a state a re made by the
governor of the state after consulta tion with
'The 20th Con stitutional Amendment Act of 1966
added a new Article 233-A which retrospectivel y
validated the appo intment of ce rtain district judges
as well as the judgements delivered by them.

th e Sta te Public Service Co mmiss ion and th e
high courtz.

3. Control over Subord inate Courts The co n-

trol over distri ct courts and other subordinate
courts including the posti ng, prom otion and
leave of persons belonging to the judicial service
of a state and holding any post inferior to th e
post of district judge is vested in the high court.

4. Interp retat ion T h e expressio n 'distri ct
judge' includes th e judges of a city civil court,
addition al di stri ct j udge, joint di stri ct judge,
assistant district judge, chi ef judge of a small
cause court, chief p residen cy magi strate, additi ona l chi ef presid en cy magistrate, session s
judge, additional session s judge and ass istant
session s judge.
The expression 'j udi cial se rvi ce' mea ns
a service con sisting exclusively of p erso ns
inte nded to fi ll t he post of di strict judge and
othe r civi l judicial posts inferior to the post
of a distri ct judge.
5. Appli cation of t he above Provisions to
C ertai n Magistrates The Governor may
direct th at the above-m entioned provisions
relating to person s in the sta te judicia l service
wou ld appl y to a ny class o r classes of magistra tes in th e state.

~ STRUCTURE AND JURISDICTION
The organi sa tional structure, jurisdiction a nd
nomenclature of the subordinate judicia ry
are laid down by the states. Hence, they differ
practice, the State Public Servi ce Comm ission
conducts a competitive exa mination ror recruitment to the judicia l service or the state.

2 In

364

,r!

I,dio, Polity

slightly fro m sta te to SL:'1tc. Broad ly speilking,
there are three tiers of civ il and c riminal courts
below th e H igh Court. Th is is shown as follows:
High Court

+

District and Sess ions Judge's Coun

I

(Crimina l Side)

(Civil Si de)

+

+

Chief Judicial
Magistrate's Co urt

Subordina te
Jud"e's Co urt
D

~

+

+

Judi c ial
Magistrate's Court

Muns iff's Court

The distri ct judge is th e highest jud icial
a uthority in the district. He/ she possesses orig·
inal and appe ll ate jurisd ict ion in both civ il as
well ~I S cr im ina l matters. In other words, the
di str ict judge is a lso the sess ions j udge. \Alhen
he/she deals with civil cases, he/she is known
as the district judge and when he/she hea rs the
criminal cases, he/ she is called as the sessions
j udge. The district judge exercises both judic ial
and adm inistrative powers. He/ she also ha s
supervisory powers over all the su bordinate
courts in the district. Appea ls aga inst hi s/he r
orders and judgements lie to the High Court.
The sess ions judge has the powe r to impose
any se nte nce in clud in g life impri sonment and
ca pital punishment (death se nten ce). However, a capital punishm ent passed by him / her
is subject to confirmation by the High Court,
whether there is an appeal or not.
Below the District and Sessions Court sta nds
the Court of Subordinate Judges on the civil

side and the Court of Chief Judi c ia l MagislTates
on the cri m inal side. The subordinate judge
exercises unlimited pecuniary jurisdiction over
civ il suitsJ . The ch ief judicial magistra te decides
c rimin a l cases which are puni shable with
imprisonment for a term of up to seve n years.
At the lowest level, on the civil si d e, is the
Court of Munsiff and on the c riminal side, is
the Court of Judi c ial Magist rate. The lllunsiff
possesses Ii mited jurisdi ct ion and decides
civ il cases of s mall pecunia ry stake 4 . The
j udi cial Ilwgistrate tries criminal cases which
are puni shab le with impri so nment for a term
of up to lhree yea rs.
In some llletropoiit<ln c it ies, there a rc c ity
civil co urts (c hief judges) on the civil side
ilnd the co urts of metropolitan lll<lgist rates
on t he crimina l side.
Some of the States fmd Presi dency towns
have established sma ll ca uses courts5 . These
cou rts decide the civil cases of sma II va lue in .a
SU Ill mary man ner. Their decision s are final, but
the High Court possesses t he power of revision.
In so me states, Panchayat Co urts try petty
civil and criminal cases. They arc variou sly
known as Nyaya Panchayat, Gram Kutchery,
Ada lati Panchayat, Panchayat Adalat and so on.
A subordinate judge is a lso known as civil judge
(sen ior division), civil judge (class I) and so on.
He/ she may also be given the powers of an assistant sessions judge. I n such a case, he/ she combines
in himse lf/ herself both civil as well as crim inal
powers like that ofa District Judge.
4A munsiff is a lso known as civil judge Uunior division), civ il judge (class-II ) and so on.
5 0e lh i, Bom bay, Calcutta a nd Madras were formerl y
ca lled presidency (Owns.
J

Table 35.1 Articles Related to Subordinate Courts at a Glance
Article No.
233.

SubJect·matter
Appointment of district judges

11
234.

tf()f'! of appointments of, and j~ments etc. delIVered ~ certain d"Istrk:t
"""judg
""''''e"s' -_ _ __

Recruitment of persons other than district judges to the judicial service

r
236.

237.

rdlnate courts

Interpretation

I n f the provisions of this Ch8j)!er to certain class or classes of Magistrates

CHAPTER.~

he original Constitution did not contain provisions with respect to tribu'·
nals. The 42nd Amendment Act of 1976
added a new Part XlV-A to the Constitution.
This part is entitled as 'Tribuna ls' and consists of only two Articles-Article 323A dea ling with administrative tribunals and Article
323B dea ling with tribunals for other matters.

T

~ ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS
I

empowers the Parliament to
provide for the establishment of administrative tribunals for the adjudication of disputes
relating recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services
of the Ce ntre, the ~tates, local bodies, public
corporations and other public authorities. 1n
other words, Artic1,e 323A enables the Parliament to take out the adjudication of disputes
relating to service matters from the civil
courts and the high courts and place it before
the administrative tribunals.
In pursuance of Article 323A, the Parliament ha s passed the Administrative Tribunals
Act in 1985. The act authorises the Ce ntral
government
, to establish one Central administrative tribunal and the state administrative
tribunals. This act opened a new chapter in the
sphere of providing speedy and inexpe nsive
justice to the aggrieved public servants.
Arti ~le ~23A

to

Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT)
The Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT)
was set up in 1985 with the principal bench
at New Delhi and additional benches in different states, At present, it has 19 regular
benches, 17 of which operate at the principal

Tribunals

seats of high courts and the remaining two at
Jaipur and Lucknow, These benches also hold
circuit sittings at other seats of high courts.
The name and jurisdi ction of Benches of
CAT are given in Thble 36,1. Similarly, the
detail s of ci rcuit s ittings of Benches of CAT
are given in Thble 36.2.
The CAT exercises original jurisdiction
in relation to recruitment a nd all service
matters of public servants covered by it. Its
jurisdiction extends to the All- India Services,
the Central civil sen' ices, civ il posts under
the Centre and civilian employees of defence
services. However, the members of the defen ce
forces, officers and servants of the Supreme
Court and the secretarial staff of the Parliament are not cove red by it.
The CAT is '3 rilUlti-member body consisting of a Chairman and Members, Originally,
the CAT consisted of a Chairman, Vi ceChairman and Members. Later, in 2006, the
provision for the Vice-Chairman was removed
by the Administrative Tribunals (Ame!ldment) Act, 2006. Hence, there is now no
Vice-Chairman in the CAT. At present, the
sanctioned strength of the Chairman is one
and sanctioned strength of the Members is
69. They are drawn from both judicial and
administrative streams. But, a person who
has not completed the age of 50 years is not
eligible for appointment as a Chairman or
Member. They hold office for a term of four
years or until they attain the age of 70 years
in case of Chairman and 67 years in case of
Members, whichever is earlier. l
I

As per the Tribunals Refonns Act, 2021.

366

,gf' Indian Polity

The appointment of Chai rma n and Members in th e CAT is made by the cent ral
gove rnm ent on the basis of reco m mendation s
ofa searc h-cum-select ion committee cha ired
by the Chi ef Ju st ice of In dia or a Judge of
Supreme Court. who is nominated by th e
Chief Just ice of India.
The CAT is not bound by the p rocedure laid
down in the Civil Procedu re Code of 1908. It
is guided by th e principles of natural justice.
These principles keep the CAT fl exible in
a pp roach. Only a nom inal fee of '{50 is to
be paid by the appli cant. The applicant may
appea r eithe r in person or through a lawye r.
Origi nally, appeals aga inst the orders of the
CAT could be made on ly in the Supreme Cou rt
a nd not in the high courts. However, in the
Chandra Kllmar easel (1997), the Supreme Court
declared this restrict ion on the jurisdiction o f
the high courts as uncollstiturional, holding that
judicial rev iew is a part of rhe basic structure
of the Constitu t ion. It laid down that appeals
against the orders of the CAT shall lie before the
division be nch of the concerned high court. Conseque ntly, now it is not possible for an aggrieved
public servant to a pp roach the Supreme Court
di rectly against an order of the CAT, WiUlOU( first
goi ng to the concerned high COllrt.

State Administrative Tribunals
T h e Administra tive Tr ib unals Act of 1985
empowers the Central government to establish
th e State Administrative Tribunals (SATh) on
spec ific request of th e concerned s tate governments.
Like th e CAT, th e SAT's exe rcise origina l
jurisdiction in relation to recruitment and all
service matters of sta te government employees.
T h e chai rm an and members of the SAl's arc
appo in ted by the central government on the
recommendations of a sea rch-cum-selection
comm ittee s ha red by th e Chief Ju stice of the
High Court of the concerned state.
The act also makes a provision for setting up
of joi n t admini strative tribunal (JAT) for [wo or
more states. A JAT exercises all the jurisdictio n
2 L. Clufluir(l Kumar vs. Union of India ( 1997). Clause 2( d)

of Article 323A was declared as unconstinltional.

and powers exe rcisable by the administrative
tribunals for such states.

~ TRIBUNALS FOR OTHER MATTERS
Under Ar ticle 323 B, the Parliament and the
state legislatures are authorised to provide
fo r the estab lishment of trib u nals for the
acljudication of disputes relating to the followi ng matters:
(a) 1}lx;Hion
(b) Fo reign exc hange, import and export
(e) Industrial and labour
(d) Land reforms
(e) Ceiling on urban property
(f) Elections 1O Parl iament a n d state
legislatures
(g) Food stu ffs
J
(h) Rent and tenancy rights
Articles 323A and 323B differ in the followi ng three aspeCls:
1. While Article 323A conte mplates establishment of tribuna ls for public service
matters onl y, Arti cle 323B co ntemplates
establishment of tribuna ls for ce rtain
other matters (ment ioned above).
2. Whi le tribunals under Article 323A can
be establ is hed only by Parliament.
tribunal s under Art icle 32313 can be
establ ished both by Parliament and state
legislatures with respect to matters failin g wit h in their legislative co mpetence.
3 . Under Article 323A, only one tribunal
for t he Cent re an d one for each state or
tWO or m ore states may be estab l is hed .
There is no question of hierarchy of
tribunal s, whereas under Art icl e 323B
a hierarchy of t ribu nals may be c reated.
In the Chandra KlImar case'l ( 1997), t he
Supre me Cou rt declared those prov is ion s of
these two articles which excluded the jurisd ictionof t he high courts and the Supreme
Court as unconstitutional. I-Ience, thej udic ia i
remedies are now avai lable agai n st the orders
of these tribunals.
3Added by the 75th Amendment Act of 1993.
~ L. ClumdlU KlIl1Iarvs. Un ion of 111(/;(1 (1997). Clause 2( d)
of Article 323A a nd Clause 3(d) of Anicle 323B were

declared as unconstitutional.

Tribunals:tl
Table 36.1
~I

Name and Jurisdiction of Benches of the CAT

No

Bench

Territorial Jurisd iction of the Bench

1.

Principal Bench,
New Delhi

NCT of Delhi

'1 2.

367

Allahabed Bench

una, Pradesh (except the districts covered by the Lucknow Bench) and Ultarakhand

3.

lucknow Bench

Uttar Pradesh (except the districts covered by the Allahabad Bench)

4.

Cunack Bench

Odlsha

Hyderabad Bench

Andhra Pradesh and Telangana

Bangalore Bench

Karnalaka

7.

Madras Bench

Tamil Nadu and Puducherry

8.

Ernakulam Bench

Kerala and Lakshadweep

9.

Bombay Bench

Maharashtra, Goa and Oadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu

Ahmedabad Bench

Gujarat

Jodhpur Bench

Rajasthan (except the !:listricts covered by the Jaipur Bench)

12.

Jalpur Bench

Rajasthan (except the districts covered by the Jodhpur Bench)

13.

Chandlgarh Bench

Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab and Chandigarh

14.

Jabalpur Bench

Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh

15.

Patna Bench

Bihar and Jharkhand

16.

Calcutta Bench

West Bengal, Sikkim and Andaman and Nk:obar Islands

17.

Guwahatl Bench

Assam, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh

18.

Jammu Bench

Jammu and Kashmir (except the districts covered by the Srlnagar Bench) and
leh district of ladakh.

19.

Srinagar Bench

Jammu and Ka shmir (except the districts covered by the Jammu Bench) and
Kargil district of ladakh.

5.

f--

..... _. . _-

=

6.

.<

Table 36.2

Bench

1.

Allahabad Bench

2.

Calcutta Bench

[ 4.

. .. ,

j

- - -1
1

Circuit Sittings of Benches of CAT

SI. No

3.

. -I

-,..- ..--

,.

Ci rcuit Sitt ings held at

--- "--.

Chandigarh Bench

Nalnltal
Port Blair, Gangtok
Shlmla

II

Madras Bench

-

,. "": Puducherry

.,. .,. "-

..

~

,Z1

J
-I
(Contd.)

368

,gJ Indian Poliry

51 No.

Bench

CircUit Sittings held at

5.

Guwahati Bench

Shillorlg, Itanagar, Kohima, Agartala, lmphal, Aizwal

7.

Bombay Bench

9.

Table 36.3
Article No.
323A.

~~

~~~

Nagpur, Aurangabad, Panaji

!!!""lI!;!!'!'"

.......

.......~

lakshadweep

Ernakulam Bench

Articles Related to Tribunals at a Glance
Subject-matter
Administrative tribunals
f$

37
T

he Consumer Protection Act, 2019
has repealed and replaced the earHer
Consumer Protection Act, ] 986. Like
the old Act, the new Act also provides for
the establishment of a three-tier Consumer
dispute redressal machinery at the District,
State and National levels. These arc called
as the District Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission, the State Consumer Disputes
RedressaJ Commission, and the National
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission. In
brief, they arc known as the District Commission, the State Commission, and the National
Commission respectively.
The three-level hierarchy of the consumer
commissions provides an alternative dispute resolution mechanism exclusively for
consumers. These arc quasi-judicial bodies.
They are also popularly known as Consumer
forums or Consumer Courts.
The District Commission is established in
each district of the state by the state government, However, the state government may
also establish more than one District Commission in a district.
The State Commission is established in
the state by the state government. It shall
ordinarily function at the state capital and
perform its functions at such other places as
the state government may notify. This is done
by the state government in consultation with
the State Commission. Further, the state government may also establish regional branches
of the State Commission.
The National Commission is established
by the central government. It shall ordinarily
function at the national capital region and

Consumer
Commissions

perform its functions at such other places as
the central government may notify. This is
done by the central government in consultation with the National Commission. Further,
the central government may also establish
regional branches of the National Commission.
At present, there are 678 District Commissions and 35 State CommiSSions with
the National Commission at the apex. The
National Commission was constituted in 19881.

• NATIONAL CONSUMER
DISPUTES REDRESSAL
COMMISSION

D I Composition
The National Commission shall consist of a
President and not. less than four or not more
than such number of members as may be
prescribed. Accordingly, in 2020, the central
government has prescribed that the National
Commission shaH consist of a President and
not less than four or not more than eleven
members. Further, out of these eleven members, at least one member shall be a woman2.
The central government may make rules to
provide for qualifications, appointment, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and
other conditions of service of the President
and members of the National Commission.
IThis information is adopted from the official website of the National Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission.
2As per the Consumer Protection (Consumer Disputes
Redressal Commissions) Rules, 2020.

370

P

Indian Polity

The Pres iden t a nd members of the Natio nal
Co m m iss io n are ap poi n ted by the ce ntral
governm e nt o n the recom mendations of a
search-cum·selcction com mittee chaired by the
Chi ef Justi ce of India or a Judge of Supreme
Court, who is nominated by th e Chief Justice
of I nelia. But, a perso n who has not co mpl eted
the age of 50 years is not eligib le for ap po in t.
mcnt as a President or member. They hold
office for a ter m of 4 years or un ti l they attain
the age of 70 years in case of Preside nt a nd
67 years in case of me mbers, whi chever is
ca rI i er;!:L.

Ne ither th e sa lary a nd allowances no r
the other terms and condit io ns of sc'rvi ce of
the President or any other me mber of the
Nat io nal Co mmi ss ion shall be va ried to hi s
d isa dva ntage after hi s appoi ntm e nt.

fl i Jurisdiction
The Nationa l Co mmi ss io n ha s the pecuniary juri sdiction, the appellate jurisdiction
a nd the rev is ion a l jurisdiction. Th ese are
explained below:
1. Pec uniary Jurisdiction: The Natio nal
Co mm ission shall have jurisdiction to
en tertai n co mplaints where the value of
the goods or se rvices paid as consideration exceeds rupees ten cro res. But the
centra l governm ent may prescribe such
othe r va lu es as it deem s fit. Accordingly,
in 202 1, thi s limit was reduced to above
rupees two crores 3 •
2. Appellate Jurisdiction: Th e Natio na l
Co mmi ss io n shall have jurisdiction to
entertain appeals aga inst the o rders of
any State Commi ssion. The a ppeal may
be made within 30 days from the date of
the order of the State Com m ission. But
the Nat iona l Co mmissio n may enterta in a n ap pea l filed after the expiry of
2a As per the 1tibunals Reforms Act, Z021.

per the Co ns umer Protect ion (.Ju risd iction of
the District Co mmissio n , t he State Commi ssion,
and the Natio na l Co mmiss ion) Rules, 2021.

J As

30 days if it is sat isfied that there was
sufficient ca use for not filing the appea l
within the given time.
Furth er, the Na tional Co mmission sha ll
a lso have jurisdiction to enterta in appeals
against the orders of the Cent ral Co nsum e r
Pro tection Authority (CCPA). The appea l
may be made within 30 days from the date
of receipt of the order of the CC PA.
3. Rev isional Jurisdiction: The Nat ion al
Co mmi ss io n shall have jurisdiction to
ca ll for the records a nd pass appropriate
orders in any consumer dispute which is
pendi ng befo re or has been decided by
a ny State Co m mission in the following
circumstan ces:
(i) If the State Co ml11i ssio n has exerc ised a jurisdi ctio n not vested in
it by law, or
(ii) If the St..l te Co mmissio n has fa Bed to
exerc ise a j urisdiction so vested, or
(i.ij) If the State Com mission has acted in
the exercise of its jurisdict ion illega ll y or with materia l irregularity.

01 1O t her Powers

In add iti on to th·e above j u risdic ti on, the
Nat iona l Comm iss ion has the fo llow in g other
powers:
1. The Na tional Commission may declare
a ny terms of contract, whi ch is unfair
to any co nsu m er, to he null and vo id.
2 . T he Natio nal Com mi ss io n sha ll have
the power to review any of the orders
passed by it if there is an error appare nt o n th e face of the reco rd. This ca n
b e done by the Commission eith er of
its mo tio n o r on an appli cation made
by a ny of the parties within 30 days of
such o rd er.
3. Where a n order is passed by the Nationa l
Co mmi ssio n ex-parte, the agg ri eved
party may make a n applicat io n to the
Co mmission for setting aside such order.
4. The Nat ional Co mmiss ion may tra nsfer
a n y com plain t p end in g before t h e

Consumer Commissions

District Commission of one state to a
District Commission of a~other state or
before one State Commission to another
State Commission. This can be done by
the Commission either on the application
of the complainant or of its own motion.
An appeal against the order of the National
·C ommission lies with the Supreme Court.
The appeal can be made within 30 days from
the date of the order of the National Commi ss ion. Howeve r, the Supreme Court may
entertain an appeal filed after the expiry of
30 days if it is sati sfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing the appeal within
the given time.

II IAdministrative Control
The National Commission shall have administrative control over all the State Commissions
in the following matters:
1. Monitoring the performance of the State
Commissions in terms of their disposal
of cases. This includes ca lling for periodical returns regarding the institution,
disposal, and pendency of cases.
2. Investigating any allegations against
the President and members of a State
Commission and submitting inquiry
reports to the concerned state government.
3. Issuance of instructions regarding the
following matters:
0) Adoption of uniform procedures in
the hearing of matters
(ii) Prior service of copies of documents
produced by one party to the opposite parties
(iii) Furnishing of English translation of
judgements written in any language
(iv) Speedy grant of copies of documents
4. Overseeing the functioning of the State
Commission or the District Commission
either by way of inspection or by any
other methods to ensure that the objectives of this Act are best served without
interfering with their qua s i-judicial
free dom.

'.

'tt 371

STATE CONSUMER DISPUTES
REDRESSAL COMMISSION

II IComposition
Each State Co mmission shall consist of a
President and not less than four or not more
than such number of members as may be
prescribed, in consultation -\vith th e central
government.
The central government may make rules
to provide for the qualifications for appointment, method of recruitment, procedure of
appointment, term of office, resignation and
removal of the President and members of the
State Commission.
The state government may make rules to
provide for sa la ries and al10wances and other
term s and conditions of service of the Pres ident and members of the State Commission.

fl lJurisdiction
The State Commission has the pecuniary jurisdiction, the appellate jurisdiction
and the revisional jurisdiction. These are
explained b elow:
1. Pecuniary Jurisdiction: The State
Commission shall have jurisdiction to
entertain complaints where the value of
the goods or services paid as consideration, exceeds rupees one crore but does
not exceed rupees ten crores. But the
central government may prescribe such
other values as it deems fit. Accordingly,
in 2021, this limit was reduced to at>ove
rupees fift y lakhs but up to rupees
two crores4 .
2. Appellate Jurisdiction: The State
Commission shall have jurisdiction to
entertain appeals against the orders of
any District Commission within the
state. The appeal may be made within
45 days from the date of the order of
the District Commission. But the State

372

x7

Ind;an PaJ;1y

Co mmi ss io n may e n tertain an appea l
fi led after the expiry of 45 days if it is
s.1t isfied th a t th e re was suffi c ie nt ca use
fo r n ot filin g t h e a ppea l wit hin the
give n time.
3. Rc vi s ional Jurisdi c tion: The Sta te
Co mmission shall have ju risdiction to
ca ll fo r the reco rds and pa ss a pp ro pria te
orde rs in any co nsume r di sp ute which
is pending befo re or h as been dec ided
by a ny Distri ct Commission within t he
state in the following circumstances:
(i) If the Di strict Comm ission has exerc ised a jurisdiction not vested in
it by law, or
( H) If the Di stri ct Commi ssion has failed
to exe rc ise a jurisdi ctio n so vested,
or
( iii) If th e Distr ict Co mmi ss ion has
acted in exe rc ise of its jurisdi c·
lio n i ll egally or w ith mater ia l
irreg ul arit y.

g IOther Powers
I n add itio n to the above jurisdi ct ion, th e State
Co mmi ss io n has the fo llowing other powers:
1. The State Co mmi ssion may declare a ny
terms of co ntract, whi ch is unfair to a ny
co nsum e r, to he null and vo id.
2. The State Co mmi ss ion shall have t he
power to review a ny of the o rde r passed
by it i r there is a n error appa ren t on th e
fa ce o f the record. This ca n be done by
the co mmi ssion e ither of its own m otio n
or on an appli cat ion mad e by a ny of th e
pa rties within 30 days of suc h ord e r.
3. Th e State Co mmi ss ion ma y t ra n sfer a ny compl<lint pe ndin g before a
Distr ict Com mi ssio n to another Distri ct
Co mmi ss ion within the sta te. Thi s Ct1 11
be don e by th e co mmi ss io n e ither on
the a ppli catio n of the co mpl a inant or
of its own motion.
4. The State Comm issio n sha ll have a dmin ·
istrative co ntrol ove r a ll t he Distri ct
Commiss ion s within its jurisdi ction .

DISTRICT CONSUMER DISPUTES
REDRESSAL COMMISSION

IIIComposition
Each Distr ict Co mm ission sha ll consi st of a
Presi dent and n ot less than two or not mo re
than suc h number of me mbers as may be
prescribed, in co n sultation with the ce ntra l
gove·rnment.
The ce ntral gove rnm e nt may make rules
to provide for the qualifi cat ion s for appoint·
ment , method of rec rui t me nt, procedure for
a ppo intm e nt, term of office, res ignat ion a nd
rem ova l of th e President a nd membe rs of the
Distri ct Co mm iss io ll .
T he state gove rnm e nt may make ru les to
provide for salari es and a ll owa nces a nd ot her
te rm s and co ndi tio ns of serv ice of th e Preside n t and me mbers of the District Comm ission.
If th e re is a vacan cy in th e office of th e
Pres id e nt or me mber of a Distri ct Co mmi ssion, then the state governme n t may direct(a ) a ny othe r specifi ed Distr ict Commissio n
to exerc ise th e jurisdi ction in respect of
t hM distri ct a lso; or
(b) the Pres id e nt or a me mbe r of any ot he r
spec ifie d Dist ri ct Co mmi ss io n to exerc ise the power and di scharge th e fun cti ons of the Presiden t or me mber of that
Distri ct Co m missio n a lso.

!I IJurisd iction
T he District Co mmi ss ion shall haveju r isdi c·
tion to entertain co mpla i nts whe re the va lue
of the goods o r se rvices paid as co nside ration does not exceed rupees on e crore. But
th e ce ntra l gove rnm e nt Ilwy prescribe such
oth e r va lue as it dee ms fit. Accordin gly, in
2021, this li m it was reduced to up to rupees
fifty lakh s',
Th e District Commiss io n s ha ll ord inari ly
fun ct ion in the di stri c t headqua rters. It may
a lso perform its fun ct ion s a t such other place
s[bid.

Consum er Commissions

in the distric t, as the state gover nmen t m ay
notify. This is done by the state gover nmen t
in consu ltation with th e State Comm ission .
The Distri ct Comm ission sh all have the
power to review any of the order passed by it
if there is an error appar ent on the face of the
record . This ca n be done by the Comm ission
Table 37.1

~ 373

either of its own motio n or on an applic atio n
made by any of the partie s with in 30 days of
such order.
Th e pecun iary jurisd iction of the Distri ct
Com mi ssion, the State Comm ission and
the Natio nal Comm ission is menti oned in
Thble 37. 1'

Pecuniary Jurisdiction of the Consumer Commissions

2.

State Commission

Above Rs. 50 lakhs but
up to Rs. 2 crores

Above Rs. 1 crore but up
to Rs. 10 crores

3.

Above Rs. 20 lakhs
but up to Rs. 1 crore

National Commi ssion

Above~ Rs. 2 CTores

Above Rs. 10 crores

Above Rs. 1 crore

38

Lok Adalats and
Other Courts

-l NATIONAL LEGAL SERVICES

The Supreme Court Legal Services Committee
has been co nstituted to admin ister and implement the lega l services programme in so far as
it relates to the Supreme Court of India.
Th e NALSA lays down poli cies, prin c ipl es,
gu id e lin es and frames effec ti ve and econo mi ca l sche mes for t he State Lega l Services
Authorit ies to implement the Lega l Sen' ices
Progra mm es t hroughou t the country.
Primaril y, the State Lega l Serv ices Authorities, District Legal Services Auth oriti es, Th luk
Legal Se rvi ces Co mm ittees, etc. have been
asked to disc harge the fo ll owing main functions on regu lar basis:
1. To provide free and co mpe te nt lega l se r·
vices to t he eligible perso ns.
2. 1b orga n ise Lok Ada lats for a m ica btc
settleme nt of disputes.
3. 1b organise lega l aware ness ca mps in the
rural a reas.
The free lega l serv ices in cl ude:
(a) Pay ment of court fee, process fees and
a ll othe r charges paya b le or in curred i n
connection with any lega l proceedin gs.
(b) Providing se rvi ce of lawyers in lega l
proceedings.
(c) Obtain i ng a nd supply of cert ifi ed COpi CS
of orders and othe r docume n ts in legal
proceed ings.
(d) Preparation of a ppeal, paper book including printing and tra n slat io n of documents in lega l proceedings.
The pe rson s e ligibl e for getting free legal
services incl ude:
(i) Women and c hildren
(;;) Membe rs of SC/ ST
(iii) Indu strial wo rkm e n

CHAPTER

AUTHORITY'

Article 39A of th e Co n stituti o n of India
provides for free legal a id to the poor a nd
we ake r secti ons of the socie ty and ensures
justi ce for a ll. Further, Articles 14 a nd 22(1)
of the Co nstit ution also ma ke it obligatory for
th e State to e nsure equality before law a nd a
lega l system whi ch promotes j ustice on the
basis of equal oppo rtuni ty to a ll. In the yea r
1987, the Legal Services Authorities Act wa s
enacted by th e Parl iament whi c h ca me into
force o n 9th Novembe r, ] 995 to esta bl ish a
natio nwide uni fo rm netwo rk for p rov id ing
free and com pete nt lega l se rvices to the
weaker section s of t he society o n the ba sis
of eq ual opportunity. The Na tional Lega l Services Authority (NALSA) has been co nstituted
under the Legal Services Authorit ies Act, 1987
to mo ni to r and eva luate imple m e nta tion of
legal aid programmes an d to lay down polic ies a nd prin Ciples for making legal se rvices
ava il a ble unde r the Act.
In every State, a Sta te Legal Services
Authority a nd in eve ry High Co urt, a Hig h
Court Lega l Servi ces Com mi ttee have been
co n st itute d . T h e Distr ic t Le gal Ser vices
Authorities, Th luk Lega l Serv ices Co mmittees
have been constituted in the Distri cts a nd
most of the Thl uks to give effect to the po li c ies
and directio ns of the NA LSA a nd to provide
free legal se rvi ces to t he people and co nduct
Lok Ada lats in the State.
IThis information is adopted from the website of the
Depa rtme nt of Just ice, Ministry of Law a nd Justice,
Government of India.

!.ok Adalots and Other Courts

(iv) Victim s of ma ss di saster, violen ce,
flood, droug ht, earthq uake, indus trial
disast er
(v) Disabled perso ns
(vi) Perso ns in custod y
(vii) Persons whose annua l incom e does n ot
exceed ~1 lakh (in the Supre me Court
Legal Servic es Comm ittee, the limit is

~ 375

(viii) Victim s of trafficking in huma n bei ngs
or begga r.

The Lok Adalat is anoth er altern ative in
judici al j ustice. This is a recent strateg y for
delive ring inform al, ch eap and exped itious
justic e to the com mon man by way of settlin g
disputes, which are pendi ng in courts and also
those, which have not yet reache d courts by
negot iation, concil iation and by adopt ing persuasive, comm o n sense and huma n appro ach
to the proble ms of the disputa nts, with the
assista nce of specia lly traine d and experi enced
memb ers of a team of con ciliators.

~ LOK ADALATS

Features

~5,OO,OOO /.)

Th e Lok Adala t is a forum where th e cases
(o r dispu tes) which are pendi ng in a court
or which are at pre-li tigatio n stage ( not yet
broug ht before a court) are com promi sed or
settle d in an amica ble mann er.

Mean ing
Th e Supre me Court has expla ined the mean ing of the institu tion of Lok Adala t in the
follow ing way2:
The 'Lok Adala t' is an old form of adjud icating system preva iled in ancie nt India and
it's validi ty has not been taken away even
in th e mode rn days. The word 'Lok Adala t'
mean s 'Peopl e's Court '. This system is based
on Gandh ia n princi ples. It is one of the
co mpo n ents of the ADR (Alter native Dispu te
Resolu tion) system . As the India n courts are
overb urden ed with the backlog of cases and
the regula r courts are to decide the cases
involv ing a length y, expen sive and tediou s
proce dure. The court takes years togeth er to
settle even petty cases. The Lok Adalat, therefore, provides altern ative resolu tion or dev ise
fo r exped itious and inexp ensive justic e.
In Lok Adala t proce edings, there are no
victors and vanqu ished and, thus, no rancou r.
The exper iment of 'Lok Adalat' as an alternate mode of di spute settle ment has com e to
be accep ted in India, as a viable, econo mic,
efficie nt and inform al one.
1..P.T Thoma s vs. Thoma s Job (2005).

The first Lok Ada lat ca mp in the pos tindep enden ce era was organ ised in Gujar at in
1982. This initia tive prove d very succes sful in
the settle ment of di sputes. Conse quent ly, the
institu tion of Lok Adala t started spread ing to
other parts of the count ry. At that time, this
institu tion was fun ctioni ng as a volun tary
and co n ciliato ry agenc y witho ut any statutory backi ng for its decisi on s. In view of its
growi ng popul arity, there arose a dema nd for
provid ing a statut ory ba cking to this institution and the award s given by Lok Adalats.
Hen ce, the institu tion of Lok Adala t has been
given statuto ry status under the Legal Services
Autho rities Act, 1987.
The Act m akes the follow ing provis ions
relatin g to the organ isatio n and functi oning
of the Lok Adalats,
1. The State Legal Servic es Autho rity or
the Distri ct Legal Servic es Autho rity
or the Su pre me Cou rt Legal Servic es
Comm ittee or the High Court Legal
Servic es Comm ittee or the Thluk Legal
Servic es Co mmitt ee may organ ise Lok
Adalats at such interv als and places and
for exerci sing such jurisd iction a nd for
such areas as it think s fit.
2_ Every Lok Adala t organ ised for an area
shall consist of such number of serv ing
or retired judici al office rs and other persons of the area as may be specified by
the agenc y organ izing such Lok Adalat.
Gener ally, a Lok Adala t consis ts of a
judicial office r as the chairm an and a

376

f1'

Indion Poli!)'

lawye r (a dvocate) a nd a socia l wor ker
as me mbe rs.
3. A Lok Acia lCit sha ll have jurisd ict ion to
de ter m ine an d to a rri ve at a co mpromi se o r settle ment between the pa rties
to a dispute in respect of:
0) any case pen ding befo re any cou rt ;
or
(ii) a ny ma tter wh ic h is [a ili ng wi t hin
t he jurisdi ction of a ny co urt and is
n ot bro ught be fo re suc h court.
Thus, the Lok Ada la t can dea l with not
o nly the cases pe ndi ng before a court bu t
a lso with the dispu tes at pre-litigatio n
stage.

But, the Lok Ada lat sha ll have no juris.d ic tio n in respect of a ny case o r ma tte r
re lat in g to an offe nce not co mpounda b le un de r a ny law. In othe r wo rds, the
offences whi ch are no n-co m pou nda b le
under a ny law fa ll o utside the pu rview
of t he Lo k Ada lal.
4. A ny case pending before the coul1 G.:1.n be
refe rred to the Lok Ada la t fo r settle me nt
if:
(i) the pa rties thereof agree to settle the
di spute in the Lok Adalat; o r
( ii) o ne of th e pa rties th e reof makes
a n appl ica tio n to th e court, for
re fe rrin g t h e c a se to t h e Lo k
Ada la t; o r
(i ii) t he court is sat isfi ed tha t the ma tte r
is a n a pp rop r ia te o ne to be ta ke n
cogn iza nce of by the Lo k Ada lat.
In the case of a pre-Iitigation d ispute, the
ma tte r cn n be referred to t he Lok Adal a t
fo r settl e me nt by the age ncy orga ni zin g
th e Lok Ada Jat, o n rece ipt of an a pplicatio n from a nyone o f t he parti es to the
dispute.
5 . The Lok Ada lat sha ll have the sa me powe rs as a re vested in a Civil Court unde r
th e Cod e of Civil Pro ce du re (1 908),
wh il e try in g a suit in respect of t he following ma tte rs:
(a) th e summoni ng and enforc in g t he
a tte nda nce of any witness exa m inin g h im / h e r on oath ;

(b) the di scovery a nd production of a ny

docu me n t;
(e) t he receptio n o f e v id e n ce o n
affidav its;
(d) the req ui s itio ni ng of any pu bl ic
reco rd o r docume nt from a ny co u rt
or offi ce; a nd
(e) s u c h ot h er m a t ters as ma y b e
p rescribed .
FurthCl~ a Lok Adn lat sha ll have the requisite powers to spec ify its own proced ure
for t he de te rm inat ion of a ny di spu te
co ming befo re it. Al so, a ll proceed ings
before a Lok Ada lat sha ll be dee m ed to
be j udicia l proceedings within th e meaning of the Ind ia n Pe na l Code (1 860) a nd
every Lok Ada la t sha ll be dee med to be a
Civil Co urt fo r t he pu rpose o f the Code
of Crim ina l Procedure ( 1973).
6. An awa rd ofa Lok Ada lat sha ll be deemed
to be a decree ofa Civil Court or an orde r
of any Olher court. Every award made by a
Lok Ada la t sha ll be fi na l a nd biniling on
a ll the pnrties to t he dispute. No a ppea l
sha ll lie to a ny court aga inst the awa rd of
the Lo k Ac1a lm.

Types
Th e re a re t hree ty pes of Lok Adalats viz.,
Nat ioJl .li Lo k Ada lats, Sta te Lok Ada lats and
Pe rm a nent Lok Ada la ts ( Pub li c Utili ty Servi ces). T he var ious cases settled in Nati ona l
Lok Ada lats a nd State Lok Ac1a la ts include
pre-li tiga tio n a nd pe ndin g ma tte rs rela ted to
Negotia ble In strume nts Act, ba nk recove ry
Cases, labou r d ispute C'::lses, serv ice matters,
cri mi na l co m po undable matters, M Acr, etd~a.
T h ese th ree ty pes of Lok Ada la ts are
ex pla in ed below· :
] . Na tional Lok AdaJats: The Nationa l Level
Lok Ada la ts a re he ld a t regula r interva ls
where o n '::1 single day Lok Ada lats a re
he ld t h ro ughout th e coun t ry, in a ll the

,"

2.'An l1u a l Re port 2020-2021, Natio na l Legal Services
Authority, p. 37.
2b.yh is info rma ti o n is obta ined Fro m the official
websi te of the Na tio na l Lega l Serv ices Authority.

Lok Adalots and Other Courts

Ji

'.

courts right from the Supre me Co urt till
the Thluk Leve ls where in cases are disposed off in huge numb ers. From 2015,
Na tio nal Lok Adala ts are b eing held on
a specif ic subjec t matte r every month .
2. State Lok Adala ts: These a re also known
as Regul ar Lok Adalats. These ca n be further classi fied into the fo llowin g types:
(a) Conti nuou s Lok Adala t: A Lok
Adala t bench sits contin uously for
a set numb er of days to facilit ate
settle ments by deferr ing un settled
matte rs to the next date and encouraging partie s to reflec t on the terms
of the mutua lly accep ted settle ment
before actual settlem ent.
(b) Daily Lok Adala t: This typ e of Lok
Adala t is organ ised on da il y basis.
(e) Mobil e Lok Adalat: These are organised by takin g the Lok Adala t set up
in a Multi- utility van to differ e nt
areas for resolv ing petty cases and
also sprea ding legal awa reness in
the area .
(d) Mega Lok Adala t: This is organ ised
in the State on a single day in all
courts of the State.
3. Perm anent Lok Adala ts: These are expla in ed below in detail.

Benefits
Accor ding to the Supre me Court, the ben efits
under Lok Adala t are as foll ows3 :
1. There is no court fee and if court fee is
alread y paid the amou nt will be refund ed
if the dispute is settled at Lok Adalat.
2. The b asic featur es of Lok Adala t are th e
procedural flexib ility and speed y trial
of the di sputes. There is no stri ct a pplication of proce dural laws like the Civi l
Procedure Code and the Ev idence Act
while assessing the cl ai m by Lok Adalat.
3. The partie s to th e dispu te can directly
intera ct with the judge throug h their
counsel which is n ot possib le in regula r
courts of law.
3P.T Tho~as vs. Thoma s Job (2005).

~ 3n

4. The award by the Lok Adalat is bindin g on

the partie s and it has the status of a decree
of a civil court and it is non-a ppealable,
which does not cause the delay in the
settlem ent of disputes fin ally.
In view of above facilit ies provid ed by the
Act, Lok Adala ts are boon to the litigat in g
publi c as they ca n get their di sputes settled
fa st and free of cost amica bl y.
The Law Comm ission of India summ arized
the advan tages of the ADR (Alter native Dispute Resol ution) in the follow ing way4:
1. It is less expen sive.
2. It is less t im e-con sumin g.
3. It is free from techn icaliti es vis-a.-vis conductin g of cases in law courts .
4. Partie s are free to discuss their differe n ces
of opinio n witho ut a ny fear of disclosure before any law courts.
5. Parties have the feeling that there is no losing or winni ng side between them but at
the same time their grievance is redressed
and their relatio nship is restored.

l PERMANENT LOK ADALATS
The Legal Servic es Autho riti es Act, 1987 was
amen ded in 2002 to provid e for the establ ishment of the Perma n ent Lok Adala ts to deal
with cases perta ining to the public utility
services.
The salien t fea tures of the new institu tion
of Perm an ent Lok Adala ts are as follows:
1. The Perma nent Lok Adalat sh all consis t of
a Chair man who is or h as been a distric t
judge or additi ona l di strict judge or ha s
held judici al office highe r in ran k tha n
that of the distric t judge and two other
person s h avin g adequ ate exper ience in
publi c utility serv ices.
2. The Perma nent Lok Adala t shall exerci se
jurisd iction in resp ect of on e or more
public utiJity serv ices such as transp ort
serv ices of passen gers or goods by air,
road a nd water; posta l, telegr aph or
Commission of India . Report No.222 entitle d
as "Need fOT Justic.e-<iispensation throug h ADR etc.,·
April 2009, pp. 22-23.

4 Law

378 ,~ Indian Policy
telephone serv ices; suppl y of powe r,
li ght or water to th e public by any
establishment; publi c co nse rvan cy or
sanitation; se rvi ces in hospitals or di spensaries; and insurance se rvices.
3. The p ec uniary j uri sd ictio n of th e
Permanent Lok Adalat shal1 be up to
rupees ten lakh s. However, the Ce n tra l
Governm e nt may increase th e sa id
pecuniary jurisdiction from time to
time. Accordingly, in 201 5, the Ce ntral
Government has increased the said pecuniary jurisdiction upto Rs. One Crore.
4. The Permanent 10k Ad.alat shall have not
jurisdiction in res pect of any matter
relating to an offence not compoundable
under any law.
S. Before the di sp ute is brought befo re any
co urt , any party to the di spute may
make an application to the Pennanent
Lok Adalat for settlement of the di spute.
After an application is made to the
Permanent Lok Adalat, no party to that
a ppli cation sha ll in vo ke jurisdiction of
any cou rt in the same dispute.
6. Wh ere it appears to the Permanent Lok
Adalat that there ex ist eleme nts of a
settlement, whi ch may be acceptable to
the parties, it shaH formulate the tenns
of a possible settl ement and submit them
to the parties for th eir observations and
in case the parties reach an agreement,
the Permanent Lok Adalat shall pass
an award in terms thereof. In case pa rties to the dispute fail to reach a n agreem ent, the Perma nen t Lok Adalat shall
decide the dispute on merits.
7. Every award made by the Pennanent Lok
Adalat sha11 be final a nd binding on all
the parties thereto and shall be by a
majority of the persons co nstituting th e
Permanent Lok Adalat.

t FAMILY COURTS
The Family Courts Act, 1984 was ena cted
to provide for the establishment of Famil y
Courts with a view to promote co nciliation

a nd secu re spe edy se ttlem e nt of disputes
relati ng to marriage and family affairs.

Reasons
Whil e introducing the Family Courts Bill in
the Parliament, the Government of India gave
the following reasons for the establishm ent of
separate Family Courts:
1. Several associations of women, other organi za tions and indi viduals have urged,
from tim e to time, that Famil y Co urts,
be set up for the settlement of famil y
di sputes, where emphasis should be laid
o n co nciliatio n a nd achieving soc ia ll y
desirabl e resu lts a nd adhere nce to ri gid
rules of procedure a nd ev iden ce shou ld
be eliminated.
2. The Law Co mmi ss ion in its 59th re port
( 1974) had a lso stressed that in dealing
with disputes co nce rning the family
th e Court ought to adopt an approach
radically different from the adopted in
ordinary civil proceedings and that it
should make reaso nable efforts at settlement before the co mmen cement of th e
trial. The Code of Civil Procedure was
amended in 1976 to provide for a special
procedure to be adopted in suits or proceedings relating to matters concerning
the family.
3 . However, n ot much u se ha s been made
by the Courts in adopting this co n ciliatory procedure and the Courts co nt in ue to deal with family di sputes in
the same mann e r as other civil matters
and the sa me adversary approach prevails. The need wa s, therefore, felt, in
th e pub lic interes t, to establish Family
Co urts for speedy se ttlement of family
disputes.
Th erefore, the ma in objectives and reaso ns
for setting up of Family Co urts are: 5
(i) 1b create a Specia li zed Co urt which will
exclus ively deal with family matters so
s-rhis information is adopted from the website of the

Department of Justice. Ministry of Law and Justice,
Govcrnmcnt o f India.

Lok Adalats and Other Courts

that such a court may h ave the necessa ry expertise to deal with these cases
expeditiously. Thus expertise and exp editious disposal are two ma in factors for
establishing such a court;
(ii) 'Ib institute a mechanism for conciliation
of the disputes rel ating to family;
(iii) 1b provide an inexpensive remedy; and
(iv) 1b have flexibility and an informal atmosphere in the conduct of proceedings.

Features
The sali ent features of the Family Courts Act,
1984 are as follows:
1. It provides for the establishment of
Family Courts by the State Governments
in consultation with the High Cou rts.
2. It makes it obligatory o n the State
Governments to set up a Famil y Court
in everyf:ity or town with a population
exceeding one million.
3. It enables the State Governments to set
up Family Courts in other areas also, if
they deem it necessary.
4. It exclusively provides within thejurisdiction of the Family Courts the matters
relating to:
. (i) matrimonial relief, including nullity of marriage, judicial separation, divorce, restitution of conjugal
rights, or declaration as to the
validity of marriage or as to the
matrimonial status of any person;
(ii) the property of the spouses or of
either of them ;
(iii) decl~ration as to the legitimacy of
any person;
(iv) guardianship of a perso n or the
custody of any minor; and
(v) maintenance of wife, children and
parents.
5. It makes it obligatory on the part of the
Family Court to endeavour, in the first
instance to effect a reco nciliation or
a settlement between the parties to a
family disp ute. During this stage, the
proceedings will be informal and rigid
rul es of procedure shall n ot apply.

(
•

~ 31'9

6. It provides for the association of social
welfare agencies, counsellors, etc., during
conciliation stage a nd al so to secure the
service of medical and welfare experts.
7. It provides that the parties to a dispute
befo re a Family Court shall not be
entitled, as of right, to be re presented
by legal practition er. However, the Court
may, in the interest of justice, seek assistance of a legal exp ert as amicus curiae.
8. It simplifies the rules of eviden ce and
procedure so as to enable a Family Court
to deal effect ively with a dispute.
9. It provides for only on e right of appeal
which shall li e to the Hi gh Court.

t GRAM NYAYALAYAS
The Gra m Nyaya layas Act, 2008 ha s be en
enacted to p rovide for the establi shm e nt
of the Gra m Nyaya layas at the gra ss roots
leve l for the purposes of providing access to
just ice to the citi ze ns at their doorsteps and
to ensure that opportunities for securing
justice a re not denied to any citizen du e to
social , economic or other disabiliti es.

Reasons
While introducing the Gram Nyayalayas Bill
in the Parliament, the Government of India
gave the following reasons for the establishment of Gram Nyayalayas:
i. Access to justice by th e poor and disadvantaged remain s a worldwide problem de spite diverse approaches a nd
strategies that have been formulated
and implemented to address it. In our
country, Article 39A of the Constitution
directs the State to secure that the
operation of the legal system promotes
justice, on a basis of equal opportunity
and shall provide free legal aid to ensure
that opportunities for securing justice
are not denied to any citizen by reason
of economic or other disabilities.
2. In the recent past, the Governm ent ha s
taken va rious measures to strengthen
judicial system, inter alia, by simplifying

380

P

Indian Polity

t h e pro ce dural l aws; incorporating
va riou s aJternati ve di spute resolution
mechanisms such as arbitration, conciliat ion and mediation; conduct ing of
Lok Adalats, etc. Th ese mea sures arc
required to be strengthened furth e r.
3. The Law Commission ofIndia in its 11 4th
Report on Gram Nyaya laya suggested
establishment of Gram Nyaya layas so
that speedy, inexpensive and substantial
justice could be provided to the common
man. The Gram Nyaya Jayas Act, 2008 is
broadl y based on the recommendations
of th e Law Commission.
4 . Justice to the poor at their door step is a
drea m of the poor. Setting up of Gram
Nyaya Jayas in the rural areas would
bring to the people of rura l a reas speedy,
affordabl e and substa ntial justice.

Features
The sa lient features of th e Gra m NyayaIayas
Act a re as fo ll ows6:
1. The Gram Nyaya laya shall be CDurt Df
Judicial Magistrate of the first class and
its preSiding Dfficer (Nyayadhikari) shall
be appointed by the State GDvernment
in con sultation with the Hi gh Court.
2. The Gram Nyaya laya sha11 be esta blished
fur every Panchaya t at intermediate level
or a group of cDntiguous Panchayats at
intermediate level in a di stri ct Dr where
there is n O' Panchayat at intermediate
leve l in a ny State, fDr a group Df cDntigu·
DU S Panchayats.
3. The Nyayadhikari s who will preside Dver
these Gram Nyaya layas are stri ctl y judi.
cial Dffice rs a nd will be drawing the
sa me sa lary, deriving the sa me pDwers
as First Class Magistrates wDrking unde r
High Courts.
4. The Gram Nyayalaya shall b e a mDbil e
co urt and shall exe rci se the pDwers Df
bDth Criminal and Civil Courts.
6Press Information Bureau, Government of India,
Se pte mber 29, 2009.

5. The seat of the Gram Nyayalaya will
be loca ted at the hea dquarters of the
inte rm ediate Pan chaya t, they wi11 go to
villages, wDrk there a nd dispDse of the
cases.
6 . Th e Gram Nyaya laya shall t ry criminal
cases, civil suits, claims o r di sp utes
which are sp eci fied in th e First Schedule
a nd the Second Schedul e to the Act.
7 . Th e Ce ntral as well as the State
Governments have been given power
to amend the First Schedule and the
Seco nd Schedul e of the Act, as per their
respective legislati ve compete nce.
8 . The Gram Nyayalaya shall follow su m·
mary procedure in criminal trial.
9 . The Gram Nyaya laya sha ll exercise the
powers of a Civil Co urt with ce rta in
mDdifications and sha ll fo llDW the sp ecial procedure as prDvided in th e Act.
10. The Gram Nyaya laya sha ll try to settle
the disputes as far as poss ible by bringing
about conc iliation betwee n the parties
a nd fDr thi s purpose, it shall ma ke use of
the conciliators to' be appOinted for this
purpose.
11 . T he judgement and Drder passed by the
Gram Nyaya laya shall be deemed to be
a decree and to avoid delay in its execu·
tion, th e Gram Nyayalaya shall fo ll ow
summary procedure fDr its exec ution .
12. The Gram Nyayalaya shall not be bDund
by the rules Df evidence provided in the
Indi an Evidence Act, 1872 but shall be
guided by the princi ples Df natural justice
and subj ect to any rul e made by the High
Co urt.
13 . Appeal in c rimina l cases shall lie to the
Court Df Session, which shall be h ea rd
and disposed Df within a period of s ix
mDnths from th e date of filing of such
a ppeal.
14. Appeal in c ivil ca ses shal1 lie to th e
District Court, whic h shall be heard a nd
disposed of within a period of six month s
from the date of filing Df the appeal.
15. A persDn accused of a n Dffence may file
a n application for pl ea bargainin g.

--.

Lo/< Ada/ats and Other Courts

Establishment
Under of the Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008, it is
for the State Governments to establish Gram
Nyayalayas in co n su ltation with the respective High Courts. However, the Act does not
make the setting-up of the Gram Nyayalayas
mandatory_
Majority of States have now set up regular
courts at Thluka level. Further, reluctance of
police officials and other State functionaries
to invoke jurisdiction of Gra m Nyayalayas,
lukewarm response of the Bar, non-availability
of notaries and stamp vendors, problem of
concurrent jurisdiction of regular courts are
other issues indicated by the States which arc
coming in the way of operationalization of the
Gram Nyayalayas.
The issues affecting operationalization of
the Gram Nyaya layas were di scussed in the
Conferen ce of Chief Justices of High Courts
and Chief Ministers of the States in April,
2013. It was decided in the Conference that
the State Government and High Court should
decide the question of establishment of Gram
Nyaya layas wherever feasible, taking into
account their loca l problems. The focus is on
setting up Gram Nayayalayas in the Th lukas
where regular courts have not been set up.

t COMMERCIAL COURTS
The Com mercial Courts Act, 2015 'wa s enacted
for the constitution of Commercial Courts,
Comme rc ial Appe11ate Courts, Commercial
Division and Comm ercial Appellate Division
in the High Courts for adjudicating co mmer·
cial disputes of specified value. Under the Act,
the 'commercial dispute' is defined broadly to
mea n dispute arising out of ordinary transac·
tions of me rchants, ba nkers, financiers and
traders such as those relating to mercantile
documents; joint venture a nd partnership
agree m e nts ; intelle ctual property rights;
in surance and other areas.

Reasons
While introdu cing the Commercial Courts
Bi11, 2015, in the Parliament, the Centra l

~ 381

Government gave the following reasons for
establi shing the Commercial Courts:
1. The proposal to provide for speedy dis·
posa l of high value commercial dis·
putes has bee n under consideration of
the Government for quite some time.
The high value comme rcial disputes
involve complex fa cts and question of
law. Therefore, there is a need to provide
for an independent mechanism for their
early resolution. The early resolution of
commercial disputes shall create a positive image to the investor world about
the independe nt and responsive Indian
lega l system.
2. The Law Commission of India, in its
253rd Report, has recommended for
the establishment of the Commercial
Courts, the Co mmercial Division and
the Co mmercia l Appellate Divisions in
the High Courts for disposal of commercial disputes of speci fi ed value.
3. Based on the above recommendation s
of the Law Com mission, the said Bill
was introduced in the Parliament. As
provided in the sa id Bi11, al1 th e suits,
appeals or applications related to commercial disputes of specified value are to
be dealt with by the Commercial Courts
or the Commercial Division of the High
Courts.
4. The proposed Bill shall accelerate economic growth, improve the international
image of the Indian Justice delivery system, and the faith of the investor world
in the legal cultu re of the nation .

Features
The salie nt features of the Act are as follows:
1. The State Government may constitute
Commercial Co urts at Distri ct level
for the purpose of exercising the juriS·
di ction over the commercial di sputes
of a specified value. But, the State
Government may, with respect to High
Co urts having ordinary original civil
jurisdiction, constitute Commercial
Co urts at th e District Judge leve1.

•

382

(J Indian pality

2. T he State Gove rnment may, except the
territories over which t he High Courts
have o rdina ry original civil jurisdiction,
designa te Comm erc ia l Appell a te Co urts
at Dist ri ct judge leve l to exe rci se the
appellate jurisdic tion over th e co mm erc ial cou rts below the district judge level.
3. In a ll High Co urts having ordinary
original c ivil juri sdi ct ion, t h e Ch ief
Justice of th e High Co urt may constitute
Co mm erc ial Divis io n for the purpose
of exe rci sing the jurisdi ctio n over the
co mmercia l disputes of a speci fied va lu e
filed in the Hi gh Co urt.
4. The Chief Ju stice ofth e co n cerned High
Court s h all co n stitute Co mm e rc ial
Appe llate Di vision to hear the a ppea ls
against the orders of the Com merc ia l
Cou rts at the Distr ict judge level and

the o rders of the Co mm e rcial Di vision
of t ha t High Cou rt.
5. The specifi ed va lu e of co mm e rcia l di s·
putes sha ll n ot be less than 3 lakh
r upees or suc h hi gher va lu e whi ch may
be no tified by the Centra l Governme nt.
In 201 8, the spec ified value of co m·
me rc ia I disputes was red uced from the
earlie r 1 crore rupees to 3 lakh ru pees.
6. A provisio n is made for co mpul so ry
med ia li on before inst it ution of a suit
which does not conte mpl ate a ny urge nt
interim re li ef. In t hi s regard, the Pre·
Jn st ituti on Med iilt iOIl <1nd Se ttl e me nt
Mecha ni sm is in trodu ced. Further, the
Ce n tra l Gove rnm e n t may e mpowe r the
Autho ri ties constituted under th e Legal
Serv ices Authoriti es Act, 1987, fo r the
purposes of pre·in sti t uti on mediatio n,

l

In this Part...
39. Panchayatl Raj

.'
CHAP'iJj

."

m39

T

he term Panchayari Raj in India signifies the system of rural local selfgovernment. It has been established in
all the states of India by the Acts of the state
legislatures to build democracy at the grass
root level. It is entrusted ""'ith rural development. It was constitutionalised through the
73rd Constitutional Amendment Act of 1992.
In the scheme of division of powers
between the Centre and the states in the

Indi an federal system, the item of 'local Government' is given to the states. Thus, the fifth
entry of the State List of the Seventh Schedule
to the Constitution of India deals with 'local
government'.

l

~~LUTION OF PANCHAYATI

Balwant rai Mehta Committee
In January 1957, the Government of India
appointed a committee to examine the
working of the Community Development
Programme (1952) and the National Extension Service (1953) and to suggest measures
for their better working. The chairman of
this committee was Balwantrai G Mehta. The
committee submitted its report in November
1957 and recommended the establishment
of the scheme of 'democratic decentraHsation', which ultimately came to be known as

40. Municipalities

Panchayati Raj

Panchayati Raj. The specific recommendations made by it are:
1. Establishment of a three-tier panchayati
raj system- gram panchayat at the village
level, panchayat samiti at the block level
and zila parishad at the district level.
These tiers should be organically linked
through a device of indirect elections.
2 . The vi1lage panchayat should be constituted with directly elected representatives, whereas the panchayat samiti and
zila parishad should be constituted with
indirectly elected members.
3. All planning and development activities
should be entrusted to th ese bodies.
4 . The panchayat samiti should be the executive body while the zila parishad should
be the advisory, coordinating and supervisory body.
5 . The district collector should be the
chairman of the zila parishad.
6. There should be a genuine transfer
of power and responsibility to these
democratic bodies.
7. Adequate resources should be transferred
to these bodies to enable them to discharge their functions and fulfil their
responsibilities.
8. A system should be evolved to effect further devolution of authority in future.
These recommendations of the committee
were accepted by the National Development

Counci l in January 1958. Th e co uncil did not
in s ist on a single r igid patte rn and left it to
the states to evol ve their own patterns suitable
to local conditions. But the basic principles
and broad fundamenta ls shou ld be identical
throughout the country.
Ra; asthan was the first state to establish
Pan chayati Raj . The scheme was inaugurated
by the prime m ini ster on October 2, 1959,
in Naga ur district. Rajasthan was followed
by Andhra Pradesh , whi ch a lso adopted the
system in 1959. Thereafter, most of the states
adopted the system.
Though most of the states c r eate d
Panchayati R<lj institutions by th e mid 19605,
there were differences from one state to
another with regard to the number of tiers,
relative position of sa miti and parishad, th e ir
tenure, compos ition, functions, finances a nd
so on. For example, Rajasthan adopted the

Table 39.1

three-tier system while Tdmi l Nadu adopted
the two-tier system . West Benga l, on tJle other
hand, adopted the four-tier system . Further,
in the Rajasthan-Andhra Pradesh pattern,
panchayat samiti was powerful as the block
wa s the uni t of p lanning a nd deve lopment,
while in Mahara shtra-Gujarat patte rn, zila
parishad wa s powerful as the d istrict was the
unit of planning and development. So me
states also established nyaya panchayats, that
is, judicial pan ch ayats to try pctty civil and
criminal cases.

Study Teams and Committees
Sin ce 1960, many study teams, committees
a nd working groups have bee n appointed to
exam ine the various aspects offunctioning of
Panchayati Raj system. Th ey are mentioned
in Thble 39. 1.

Study Teams and Comm ittees on Panchayati Raj

SI No

Yeilr

Name of the study Team

1.

1960

Committee on Rationalisation of Panchayat Statistics

V.R. Reo

2-

1961

_119 Group on Ponchoyots and CooperotIYes

S.D. MIshro

3.

1961

Study Team on Panchayati Raj Administration

V.lswaran

4.

1962

SIudy Teem on Nyoye PancItoyats

G.R. RaJgoj>aI

5.

1963

Study Team on the Position of Gram Sabha in Panchayatl Raj Movement

6-

1963

7.

1963

8.

CommIttee

-

SIudy Group on 8udgaIfng and Accounllng

Chairman

_ure

of PanchayoU Raj

RR Diwakar

M.1Iomo

Krlshnayya

Study Team on Panchayatl Raj Finances

K. Santhanam

1965

Committee on Panchoyo1I Raj EIoc1Ions

K. santhanem

9.

1965

Study Team on the Audit and Accounts of Panchayatl Raj Bodies

RK Khanna

10.

1966

COromftloe on Panchayotl Raj Training CentNs

G. Ramachandran

11.

1969

Study Team on Involvement of Community Development Agency
and Panchayatl Raj Institutions in the Implementation of Basic land
Reform Measures

V. Ramanathan

12-

1972

_119 Group far /'OnnUII11On of fifth _
_ _ and PanchayoU RoJ

N.Ramakllshnayyo

13.

1976

Committee on Community Development and Panchayatl Raj

veer Pion on Community

Smt. Daya Choubey

Panchayati Raj

Ashok Mehta Committee

)

In December 1977, the Janata Government
appointed a com mittee on panchayati raj
institutions under the chairm anship of Ashok
Mehta. It submitted its report in August 1978
and made 132 recommendations to revive
and stre ngthen the declining pa nchayati raj
system in the country. Its ma in recommenda·
tions were:
1. The three-tier syste m of panchayati
raj should be replaced by the two-ti er
system, that is, zil a parishad at the
district level, and below it, the manda I
panchayat co n sisting of a group of villages with a total population of 15,000
to 20,000.
2. A district sho uld be the first point for
decentralisation under popular supervi·
sion below the state level.
3. Zila parishad shou ld be the executive
body and made responsible for planning
at the distr ict level.
4. There should be an official participation
of political parties at all levels of panchayat elections.
5. The panchayati raj institutions should
have compul sory powers of taxation to
mobilise their own financial resources.
6. There should be a regular social audit by
a district level agency and by a committee of legislators to check whether the
funds allotted for the vulnerable social
and economic groups are actually spent
on them.
7. The state government should not supersede the panchayati raj institutions. In
case of an imperative supersession, elections should be h eld within six months
from the date of supersession .
8. The nyaya panchayats should be kept
as separate bodies from that of development panchayats. They should be
presided over by a qualified judge.
9 . The chief electoral officer of a state in
consultation with the chief election
co mmissioner should organise and co nduct the pan chayati raj elections.

~ 385

10. Development functions shou ld be transferred to the zila parishad and a1l
development staff should work under its
co ntrol and supervis ion.
11 . The voluntary agencies should play an
important role in mobilising the support of the people for panchayati raj.
12. A ministe r for panchayati raj should be
appointed in the state counci l of ministers to look after the affairs of the
panchayati raj institutions.
13. Seats for SCs and STs should be reserved
on the basis of their population.
14. A constitutio nal recognition should be
accorded to the Pan chaya ti Raj institutions. This would give them the requisite
sta tus (sa n ctity and stature) and an
assurance of co ntinuous functioning.
Due to the collapse of the Janata Government before the completion of its term, no
action could be taken on the recommendations
of the Ashok Mehta Committee at the central
level. However, the three states of Karnataka,
West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh took steps to
revita lise the panchayati raj, keeping in view
so me of the recommendations of the Ashok
Mehta Committee.

C. Y.K. Rao Committee
The Committee to review the existing Administ rative Arrangements for Rural Development and Poverty Alleviation Programmes
unde r the chairmanship of G.V.K. Rao was
appointed by the erstwhile Planning Co mmission in 1985. The Commi ttee came to the
conclusion that the developmental process
was gradua ll y bureaucratised and divorced
from the Panchayati Raj . This phenomena of
burea ucratisation of development administration as against the democratisation weakened
the Panchayati Raj institutions resulting in
what is aptly called as 'grass without roots'.
He nce/ the Committee made the following
recommendations to strengthen and revitalise
the Panchayati Raj system:
(i) The district level body, that is, the Zila
Parishad should be of pivotal importance

386 ,~ Indian Polity
in the sche me of democra[ic decentralisatio n . It stated that "the di strict is the
proper un it for planning an d development and the ZiJa Parishad should
beco me the principal body fo r management of a ll deve lopment programm es
which can be handled at that level."
(ii) The Panchaya ti Raj in stituti ons at the district and lowe r levels sho uld be assigned
an important role wi th respect to planning, implementation and monito ring
of rural development programmes.
(i ii) Some of the planning functio n s at the
state leve l sho uld be transferred to the
district leve l planning units for effective
decentralized district planning.
(iv) A post of District Development Comm issione r should be created. He/ she should
act as the chief e.xecutive officer of the
Zila Parishad a nd should be in charge of
all the development departments at the
district level.
(,') Elections to the Panc hayati Raj instinltions should be held regularly. It found
that e lections became overdue for one
or more tiers in 11 states.
Th us t he co mmittee, in its sc h e me of
decentralised system of fi e ld administration,
assigned a leading ro le to the Panchayati I~j
in loca l plannin g and development. rt is in
thi s respect that the recommendations of
the G. \( K. Rao Co mmittee Report ( 1986) differed from those of th e Dantwala Com mittee
Report on Block-Level Planning (1978) and the
Hanumantha Rao Committee Report on District
Planning (1984). Both the committees have
suggested that the basic decentralised planning
function shou ld be done at the district level.
The Han umantha Rao Committee advocated
separate district pla.nning bodies under ei ther
the District Co ll ector or a minister. rn both the
models, the Collector should playa significant
role in the decentral ised planning though the
Committee st..,1.tecl that P31lchayati Raj inst:icurions would also be associa ted with this process
(of deccntra li sed plann in g). The co mmittee
recommended that the Coll ecto r sho uld be the
coordinator, at the di strict level, of a ll developmenta l and planning activities. Thus, the

Hanumantha Rao Committee differed in this
respect from those of the Ba lwantrai Mehta
Committee, the First Administrative Reforms
Commission of India , the Ashok Mehta Committtc and finally the G.V.K. Rao Committee
which recomm ended red uction in the develop..
mental role of th e District Collector and which
assigned a 111C:ljor role to th e Panchaya ti Raj in
d eve lopment administration.

L M Singhvi Committee
In 1986, R.<lj iv Gan dh i gO\'crnment appo in ted
<I com m ittee to prepare a concept paper on
' Rev italisation of Pa nc hayati .Raj Institutions
for Democracy and Development' under the
chairmanship of L.M. Singhvi. It made the
following recommendations.
(i) The Panchayati Raj insticutions sho uld
be const itution a ll y recog ni sed, protected and preserved. Fo r this purpose,
a new chapter shou.ld be added in the
Constitution of [ndia. This will make
their iden tity and integrity reasonably
and subsmntially inviolate. It a lso suggested constitutional provisions to ensure
regul ar, free and fair electio ns to t he
Panchayati Raj bodies.
(ii) Nyaya Pallchayats shou ld be established
for a cluste r of villages.
(ii i) The vi ll ages should be reorga.nised to
ma ke Gram Panchayats more viable. It
also em phasised the importance of th e
Gram Sab ha and cH Ued it as the embodiment of direct democracy.
(iv) The Vi ll age Panchayats should have more
financial resources.
(v) The j udicia l tribunals should be established in each st..,1. te to adjudicate controversies about election to the Panchayati
Raj institut.ions, their disso lution and
other matters related to the ir functioning.

Thungon Committee
In 1988, a sub-committee of th e Consu ltat ive
Com m ittee of Parliament was co n stitu ted
under the chairma n ship of P.K. Thungon to
exam in c the politica l and ad mini strative structure in the district for th e purpose of district

Pahthayati Raj

)

l

,

p1anning. This committee suggested for the
strengthening oftiie Patichayati Raj system, it
made the fol1owing; reconiniendations:
1. The Parichayati Raj bodies should be constitution ally recognized.
2. A three-tier system ofPanchaya-ti Raj witli
panchayats at the vHiage, block ahd distrid levels.
3. Zilla Parlshad should be the PIvbt of the
Panchayati Raj system, it sHou ld ad as
fhe plannirig and deveicrpment agency
in the district;
4 ; THe Panchayati Raj bodies shOU ld have a
fixed tenure of five years.
5. The maXImum period ofstiper session of
a body shou ld tie six months..
6. A plannIng ahd co~otdinatlon committee should be set~up at the state level
under the chairmaT!shlp of the minister
for planning .. The presidents of Zi11a
Parishads sho01d be Its members;
7. A detaIled Hst of subjects fo'r Panthayati
Raj should be prepared and incorporated
in the ConstItution.
8. Resen-ation of seats in all the three-tiers
should be on the basis of population. There
should also be reservation for women.
9. A state finance commission shou ld be
-set-up in eaoh state. It would lay down
the criteria ahd guidelines for the devolution of finances' to the Panohayafi Raj
institUtions.
101• The distrlct tollector should be the chief
executive offi'cer of the ZIlla Parishad.

Gadgil Committee
The Co mmittee on P01icy and Programmes
was ~ohst ituted in 1988 by the Congress party
under the chairmanship of V.N. Gadgi1. This
committee was asked to consider the q'uestion
of 1o'}l0w hest Panchayati Raj institutions could
be made effective: In this context, the committee made ihe fonowing recommendati"ons:
1.. A constitutional status should be"bestowed
on the Panchayati Raj institutions.
1:. A three-tier sy"s tem ofPahchayati Raj"With
panchayats at the v"il1age, block arid district levels.

~ 387

3. Tlie term of Panchayati Raj institutions

,libuld be fixed at fi ve yeafS,
4. The tnerilMts bftlie Panthayats at all tM

three ievels sholild be dircctly elected"
5. Reservation fot SCs, 815 a nd Women.
6. The Panohayatl Raj bodies shbuld have the
responsibility of preparation and implementation of plans tor socio-economic "
development. FOr thiS purpose, a Hst

of sujjjects should be specified ih the
cdnstHu"tio"n.

7. The Pahchayat Raj bodies sho uld be

etnpolverca to leVYI coHect and appropriate taxes and duties.
8. Estah li sh'ment of a State Finance
Commission for the aflocation of
finances to th e Panthayats.
9. Estabilshment of a State Election
Commission for the conduction of elec~
Hons"to tfie patwhayats.
The above recommehdations of the Gadgi l
Com mittee became the hasiS"for drafting an
amendment bl]] aimed at conferring the
const itutional status and protection to the
Pailchayati Raj in stitUtions;

Constit"u tionalisation
RaHv Gandhi Government The RaJiv Gandhi
Government hitroduced the 64th Constitutional Amendment BiH in the Lok Sabha in
July ]989 to constitutionalise panchayatl raj
institutions and make them mOre powerful
and broad based, Althougli, the Lok sabha
passed the blll in August 1989, it was nof
approved by the Rajya Sabha. 'the bill ,ifas
vehemefitiy opposed by the Opposition on the
ground that It sought to strengthe n centralisation in the federal system,

Y.P. Singh Government The National Front
Government, soon after assuming office' in
Novembet 1989 under the Prime Miriistership of V.P. Singh, annolincE;d thai it wouid
take steps to strengthen the panchayati raj
Instifutions. In June 1990,. a two.<day conference" of the Sta"te chief mlriisters undcr the
chairtnansh'i"p of V:P. SIngh wa"s held to disciiss the Issues te],Hing to the"sttengthenfng
of the panchayati raj bodies. The conference

388 ,~
~,~/~nd~~~n~p~o/~i~~____________________________________________________
approved the p roposals for the introduction of
a fresh constituti onal amendm en t bi ll. Consequen tl y, a co nstitutiona l am en dme n t bi ll was
in trod uced in the 10k Sab ha in Septe mber
1990. However, th e fall of the govern men t
resulted in the lapse of the bil l.

Narasimha Rao Government Th e Co ng ress
Governme n t u n der th e p rime m in istersh ip
of P.V. Na ras imh a Rao once aga in cons ide red the matter of the co n stitu tion alisation of
pa nchayati raj bodies. It drasticall y modifi ed
the p ro posals in thi s regard to delete th e
co ntroversia l aspects and in troduced a consti tu tio nal a mendm en t b ill in t he 10k Sabha
in Septem ber, 1991. Thi s b ill fi n a ll y emerged
as th e 73rd Constitu tio na l Am end ment Act,
1
1992 a nd ca me into force on 24 Apr il , 1993 •

t 73RD AMENDMENT ACT OF 1992
Significance of the Act
Th is act has added a n ew Pa rt-I X to the
Const itution ofJnd ia. Thi s pa rt is enti tled as
'The Pa n chayats' a nd co nsists of provisio ns
from Articles 24 3 to 243-0. In add iti o n, the
act has a lso added a new Eleve n th Sch edul e
to th e Constitutio n. Th is sch edu le contains
29 fun ctional ite ms ofthe pa nchayats. It dea ls
with Article 243-G.
The act has g iven a pra ct ical shape to
Article 40 of the Co nstitut ion whi ch says that,
"Th e State shall ta ke steps to organ ise village
pa nchayats a nd endow them with such powers
and a uthority as may be necessa ry to enable
th em to function as un its of self-govern m ent,"
Thi s article form s a part of the Directi ve Princip les of State Policy.
Th e act g ives a con stitutio nal status to the
pan ch ayati raj in st ituti ons. It has b ro ught
th em under the purview of the j usticiabl e
part of th e Consti tution. In othe r wo rds, the
lThis bill was passed by the Lok Sabha on 22 December, 1992, a nd by the Rajya Sabha on 23 Decembe r,
1992. Later, it was app roved by the 17 st.1 te assemblies and received the assen t of the President on
20 Apri l, 1993.

st.:'1te governm en ts a re un der co nstitutio nal
obli gat ion to adopt the n ew pan chaya ti raj
sys tem in accordance with the p rovis ion s of
the act. Consequen tly, ne ithe r th e formation
of panchayats no r the holding of elections at
regula r in terva ls de pend on the will of th e
state government any more.
Th e p rovisions of the act ca n be grouped
in to two categories- comp ulsory and vol unta ry. The com pu lsory (mandatory or obli gatory) provisions of the act have to be included
in the state laws crea ting th e new panchayati
raj system. The volun tary provisions, o n the
other hand, may be included at the discretion
of th e states. Thus th e voluntary provis ion s
of the act ensu res the r igh t of th e sta tes to
take loca l factors like geof,'Ta phical, po liticoadministrati ve a nd others, in to consideration
whil e adopting the new panchayati raj syste m.
The act is a signi fi ca nt land ma rk in the
evolu tion of grassroot dem ocratic insti tu tio ns
in th e cou n tr y. Jt tran sfe rs the rep resenta t ive
democracy in to participatory democracy. It is
a revolutio nary co ncept to bu il d de mocracy
at the grass root level in th e cou n try.

Salient Features
Th e sali en t fea tures of the act are:
Gram Sabha The act p rov ides for a Gra m
Sab ha as the founda t ion of th e pa nc hayati
raj system. It is a body consisti ng of persons
reg istered in the electo ra l rolls of a vill age
com p rised with in the area of Pan chaya t a t
the vill age level. Thus, it is a vill age assembly
con sistin g of all th e reg iste red voters i n the
area of a pa nchayat. it may exercise such powers a nd perfo r m such fun ct ions at the village
level as the leg islatu re of a state determ ines.
Three-Tier System The act provides for a
three-tier system of pan chaya ti raj in ever y
state, that is, panchayats at the village, in tennedjate, a nd district levels z. Thus, the act bri ngs
2yhe Act defin es a ll these te rms in the followi ng
mann er:
(a) Pa nchayat means a n institutio n (by whatever
na me C<1 Iled) of self-gove rn me n t fo r ruml areas.

)

Panchayati Raj
abou t uniformity in the structure of panchayati raj th roughout the country. However,
a state h av ing a population not exceeding
20 lakh may not constitute panchayats at the
intennediate level.
Election of Members and Chairpersons 1\.11
the members of panchayats at .the village,
intennediate an d district levels shall be elected
directly by th e people. Further, the chairperson
of panchayats at the intermediate and district levels sh all be elected indirectl y.-by a n d
from amongst the elected members thereof.
However, the chairperson of a panch ayat at the
vill age level shall be e lected in such mann er
as the state legislature determines.
The chairperson of a pa n chayat and other
mcmb ers of a panchayat elected directly or
indirectly shall have the right to vote in the
meetings of the panch ayats.
Reservation of Seats Th e act prov ides for
th e reservation of seats for scheduled castes
and scheduled tribes in every panchayat (Le.,
at all th e th ree levels) in proportion of the ir
population to the total population in the
panchayat a rea. Further, th e state legislature
sh a ll provi de for the reservation of offices of
chairperson in th e panchayat at the vill age
or a ny oth er level for th e SCs and STh.
The act provides for th e reservation of not
less than one-third of the total number of
seats for women (including the number of
seats resen'cd for women belonging the SCs
and S1S). Furth er, not less than one-third of
th e tota l n u mber of offices of chairpersons in
the panchayats at each level sha ll be reserved
for women.
The act also auth or ises the legislature of a
state to make any provision for reservation of
seats in any panchayat or offices of chairperson
(b) Village means a village specified by the governor
by public notification to be a village for this
purpose, and inc1udes a group of villages so
specified.
(c) Intermediate level means a level between the
village and district levels specified by the governor by ·public notification for this purpose.
(d) District means a district in a state.

'!1 389

in the panchayat at any level in favou~ of backward classes.
The reservation of seats as well as the
reservation of offices of chairpersons in
the panchayats for the sch edu led castes and
schedu led tribes sh a1l cease to have effect
after the expiration of the perioq specified in
Article 334 (which is presently eighty years,
th at is, till 2030).
It must be noted here that the above provision relating to the re~ervation of seats in
p~nch ayats (both members and chairpersons)
for the schedu led castes is not applicable
to the state of Arunachal Pradesh. Th is is
because th e state is inhabited fully by indigenous tribal people and there are no scheduled
castes. This provision was added later by the
83rd Constitutional Amendment Act of 2000.
Duration of Papchayats The act provides for
a five-year term of office to the panchayat at
every level from the date of it's first meeting.
However, it can be dissolved before the completion of its term. Furthcr,freshelectionstoconstituteapanchayat shall be comp leted (a)
before the expiry of its duration of five years;
or (b) in case of dissolution, before the expiry
of a period of six months from the date of its
dissolution.
But , where the remainder of the period (for
which the dissolved panchayat would have contipued) is less than six mon ths, it shall n ot be
necessary to hold any election fo r const ituting
the new panchayat for such period.
Moreover, a panchayat constituted upon
the dissolution of a panchayat before the
expiratio n of its duration sha ll continue on ly
for th e remainder of the period for wh ich the
disso lved panchayat would have cont inued
had it not been so dissolved. In oth er words,
a panchayat reconstituted afte r premature
disso lution does not enjoy th e fu ll period of
five yea~s but remains in office only for th e
re m ainder of the period.
Disqualificat ions A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as or for being a m ember
of panchayat if he/ she is so disqualified, (a)
under any law for the time being in force (or

390 (J' Indian PoUty
the purpose of elections (Q the legislature of the
~tate co ncerned, or (b) unde r any law ma de by
t he stMe legislature. Howeve r, no person sha ll
be di sq ualifi ed on the ground tha t he/she is
less than 25 years of age if he/ she has a tta in ed
th e age of2 1 years. Furth er, a ll questions of disqualifi c<ltions shall be referred to such a uthority as the state legislature determ in es.
State Election Commission Th e super inten de nce, direction a nd control of th e preparation of electora l roll s and the co ndu ct of a ll
e lection s to th e panc hayats sh;:1 1I be vested in
the sta te e lecti o n co m III issio n. It co nsists of a
state election co mmi ss ioner to be appointed
by [he governor. His/ her conditio ns ofserv ice
a nd ten ure of office shall a lso be determined
by the gove rno r. He/ she sha ll not be re moved
from the office except in the ma nne r and on
th e grounds prescr ibed for the remova l of a
judge of the state high cou rt 3 . I-lis/ her co ndition s of se rvice shrill not be varied to hi s/ her
di sadvanta ge Cl ft er hi s/ her c1 ppo illtmCIl1.
The state leg islature may make provisi on
with res p ect to all matt e rs relat in g to
e lecti o ns to t he pan chayats.
Powers and Functions The state legis lat ure may e ndow the Pa nchayats wit h such
powers and a utho rity as may be necessary
to enable the m to fun ction as in stitution s of
se lf-government. Such a sche me may co ntai n
provi sion s for the devo luti on of powers a nd
respons ib iliti es upon Panchayats a t the a ppropriate level with respect to (a) th e preparation of plans for economic deve lo pment a nd
socia l justice a nd ( b) the impl e me ntat io n of
schem es for economic developm e nt and social
justice as may be e ntru sted to them , including
those in re latio n to the 29 mHtte rs listed in the
Eleve nth Sc hedul e.
Finances The state legislature may (a) authori se a pa nchayat to levy, collect and appropriate
)A judge of a high court ca n be removed from hi s!
her o ffi ce by the President on the recom me ndation
of the I)arliame nt. This means that a sta te elect io n
commissio ner ca nnot be removed by the governo r,
though ap pointed by him! her.

ta xc~, duties, (Oil s and fe es; (b) assign to a pan-

chaya t taxes, duties, to ll s a nd fees levied and
coll ected by th e state government; (c) provide
for maki ng grants-i n-aid to the pan chayats from
the conso lidated fund of the sGltej a nd (d) provide for co nst itu tio n of funds fo r crediting a ll
moneys of the pan chayats.
Finance Commission Th e governor of a stale
shall , after every five yea rs, con stitute a
fin ance co mmi ss io n to review th e fi nan c ia l
posit ion of the paJ1chayat s. It shall mak e the
foll owing reco lllmendat io ns to the Gove rnor:
1. The prin c ip les that shou ld govern:
(a) Th e di stribution betwee n the sta te
a nd th e pan c haya ts of th e net proceeds of t he taxes, duties, tolls and
fees lev ied by t he sta te an d al!octl tion of sha res amongst the p;:l ll chayats at a ll leve ls.
(b) The dete rmin at ion of taxes, duties,
toll s and fees that ma y be Hss igned
to th e pa nc haya ts.
(c) The gra nts- in-aid to the pan c hayats
from th e con so lidated fund of the
state_
2. The measures n eeded to improve the
fin a nc ial position of the panchayats.
3 . Any oth er matter referred to it by the gove rnor in the interests of sou nd finance
of the pan chayats.
Th e stCite legislature may provide for th e
compositi o n of th e commission, the required
qual ifications of its members and the manner
of their se lect ion.
The governor shall pla ce th e reco mmendation s of the comm iss ion a long with th e action
take n report be fore the state legi slature.
The Ce ntral Finan ce Co mmiss ion shall also
suggest the meas ures needed to augm e nt the
con so lida ted fund of a state to su ppl em ent
the resources of the pan c hayats in th e states
(on the bas is of th e recommendation s made
by the finan ce co mm ission of the state) .
Audit of Accounts The sta te leg islature may
make provi si ons with respect to the maintenan ce of accounts by th e pan clwya ts and the
auditing of such acco unts.

,

,

•

•

Panchoyati Raj

Application to Union Territories The provisions of this Part are applicable to the Union
territories. But, the President may direct that
they would apply to a Union territory subject
to such exceptions and modifications as hel
she may specify.
Exempted States and Areas The act does not
apply to the states of Nagaiand, Meghalaya
and Mizoram and certain other areas. These
areas include, (a) the scheduled areas and the
tribal areas in the states4 ; (b) the hill areas
of Manipur for which district councils exist;
and (c) Darjeeling district of West Bengal for
which Darjeeling Gorkha Hi11 Council exists.
However, the Parliament may extend the
provisions of this Part to the scheduled areas
and tribal areas subject to such exceptions
and modifications as it may specify. Under
this provision, the Parliament has enacted
the uProvisions of the Panchayats (Extension
to the Scheduled Areas) Act", 1996, popularly
known as the PESA Act or the Extension Act.

•.

Continuance of Existing Laws and
Panchayats All the state laws relating to
panchayats shall continue to be in force until
the expiry of one year from the commencement of this act. In other words, the states
have to adopt the new panchayati raj system
based on this act within the maximum period
of one year from 24 April, 1993, which was
the date of the commencement of this act.
However, all the panchayats existing immediately before the commencement of act shall
continue till the expiry of their term, unless
dissolved by the state legislature sooner.
Consequently, majority of states passed the
panchayati raj acts in 1993 and 1994 to adopt
the new system in accordance with the 73rd
Constitutional Amendment Act of 1992.
"At present, ten states of India have scheduled areas.
These are: Andhra Pradesh, 'Thlangana, Jharkhand,
Chhatisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha and Rajasthan.
Presently, there are a total of ten tribal areas
(autonomous districts) in the four states of Assam
(3) , MeghaJaya (3), Tripura (1) and Mizoram (3).

~ 391

Bar to Interference by Courts in Electoral
Matters The act bars the interference by
courts in the electoral matters of panchayats.
It declares that the validity of any law relating
to the delimitation of constituencies or the
allotment of seats to such constituencies cannot be questioned in any court. It further lays
down that no election to any panchayat is to
be questioned except by an election petition
presented to such authority and in such manner as provided by the state legislature.
Eleventh Schedule It contains the following
29 functional items placed within the purview
of panchayats:
1. Agriculture, including agricultural
extension
2. Land improvement, implementation of
land reforms, land consolidation and
soil conservation
3. Minor irrigation, water management and
watershed development
4. Animal husbandry, dairying and poultry
5. Fisheries
6. Social forestry and farm forestry
7. Minor forest produce
8. Small-scale industries, including food
processing industries
9. Khadi, village and cottage industries
10. Rural housing
11. Drinking water
12. Fuel and fodder
13. Roads, culverts, bridges, ferries, waterways
and other means of communication
14. Rural electrification, including distribution of electricity
15. Non-conventional energy sources
16. Poverty alleviation programme
17. Education, including primary and
secondary schools
18. Technical training and vocational
education
19. Adult and non-formal education
20. Libraries
21. Cultural activities
22. Markets and fairs
23. Health and sanitation including hospitals,
primary health centres and dispensaries

392

fJ Indian Polity

24. Famil y welfa re
25 . Wom en a n d child development
26. Social welfare, including welfare of t he
handica pped and m e ntally retarded
27. Welfare of t he weaker section s, and in
parti cular, of the schedul ed castes and
th e schedul ed tribes
28. Public distribution system
29. Maintenance of comm unity assets.

COMPULSORY AND VOLUNTARY
PROVISIONS
Now, we will ide ntify separately the co mpul·
sory (obligatory o r mandatory) a nd volun tary
(d iscretionary or optional) prov isions (features) of the 73rd Co nstitution a l Amen dm e nt
Act (1992) or t he Part IX of th e Constitution :

II I Compulsory Provisions
1. Organisation of Gram Sab ha in a village

or grou p of vil1 ages.
Z. Estab li shme nt of pan ch ayats at the vil·
lage, intermediate and district levels.
3. Direct elect.ions to a ll seats in panchayats
at the village, in termedi ate and district
1evels.
4. Indirect elections to the post of chairperson of pa nchayats at t he intermedi ate
a nd district levels.
5. Voting righ ts of the cha irperson a nd other
members of a pa nchayat e lected directly
or indirectl y.
6. 21 years to be the min imum age for co ntesting elections to panchayats.
7. Reservation of seats (both members
and chairpersons) for SCs and STh in
pan chayats at a ll the three levels.
8. Resen 'ation of one-third seats (both me mber s a nd chairperson s) for women in
panchayats at a ll th e th ree leve ls.
9. Fi..xing tenure offive years fo r panchayats
at all levcls and holding fresh elect io ns
within six months in the eve nt of supe rsess ion of any pan chaya t.
10. Esta bli shm c nt of a Sta te Election
Com mi ssion for co nduct in g e lect io n s
to t he panchayats.

11. Co n st ituti o n of a State Fin a n ce
Com mi ss ion after every five years to
review t h e financial position of the
panchayats.

III IVoluntary Provisions
1. Endowi ng the Gram Sab ha with powers

and fu n ctio ns at the village leve l.

2. Dete rmining the ma nn e r of e lect ion of

the chairpe rson of the vi ll age panchaya t.

3. Givi ng representation to the ch a irperso ns

of the village panchayats in the intermediate panchayats or in the case of a state
not hav in g in te rm edi ate panchayats, in
th e distr ict pan chayats.
4. Giving representation to the cha irperso ns
of t he intermedi ate panch ayats in the
district panchayats.
5. Givi ng representat ion to members of the
Parliament (both the Houses) an d the
state legisla ture (both the Houses) in
the pa nchaya ts a t diffe rent levels fa llin g
within their con stit ue nc ies.
6. Providing reservation of seats (both memo
bers and c hairpersons) for ba ckwa rd
classes in panchayats at a ny level.
7. Granting powers and a uthority to the panc hayats to e nabl e th em to fun ction as
institutions of self-governm ent ( in brief,
making them a utonomo us bodies).
8. Devolution of powers and respo nsi bili ties upon panchayats to prepare plans
for eco nomi c deve lopm e nt and socia l
justice; a nd to perform so me or all of
th e 29 fun ctions li sted in the Eleventh
Schedule of th e Co nstitution .
9. Granti n g financial powe r s to the
p a n chayats, that is, authorizin g them
to levy, co llect and appropr iate taxes,
duties, to ll s a nd fees.
10. Assigning to a pa nchayat th e taxes, duties,
toll s a nd fees levied an d co llected by the
su1te gover nm e nt.
11. Making the grants-i n-a id to the panchayats from th e co nsolidated fund of the
state.
12. Providing for constitu tion of funds for
crediti ng all m oneys of t he panchayats.

.

Pa"chara' Raj

PESA ACT OF 1996 (EXTENSION
ACT)
The provisions of Part IX of the constitution
relating to the Panchayats are not app li·
cable to the Fifth Schedule areas. However,
the Parliament may extend these provisions
to such areas, subject to such exceptions
and modifications as it may specify. Under
this provision, the Parliament has enacted
the "Provisions of the Panchayats (Exten sion to the Scheduled Areas) Act~, 1996,
popularly known as the PESA Act or the
Extension Act.
At present, ten states have Fifth Schedule Areas. These are: Andhra Pradesh,
Thlangana, Chhatisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Odisha and Rajasthan. All the
ten states have enacted requisite compliance
legislations by amending the respective
Panchayati Raj Acts.

Objectives of the Act
The objectives of the PESA Act are as follows 5 :
1. 1b extend the provisions of Part IX of the
Constitution relating to the panchayats to the scheduled areas with certain
modifications
2. 1b provide self-rule for the bulk of the
tribal population
3. 1b have village governance with participatory democracy and to make the gram
sabha a nucleus of all activities
4. To evolve a suitable administrative
framework consistent with traditional
practices
S. 1b safeguard and to preserve the traditions and customs oftribal communities
6. 'Ib empower panchayats at the appropriate levels with specific powers conducive
to tribal requirements
7. 1b prevent panchayats at the higher level
from assuming the powers and authority
of panchayats at the lower level of the
gram sabha
5

S.K. Singh, Panchayats in Scheduled Areas, Kurukshetra, May 2001, p. 26.

~ 393

Features of the Act
The features (or the provisions) of the PESA
Act are as follows:
1. A state legislation on the Panchayats in
the Scheduled Areas shall be in consonance with the customary law, social
and religious practices and traditional
management practices of community
resources.
2. A village shall ordinarily consist of a
habitation or a group of habitations or a
hamlet or a group of hamlets comprising
a community and managing its affairs in
accordance with traditions and customs.
3. Every village shall have a Gram Sabha
consisting of persons whose names are
included in the electoral rolls for the
Panchayat at the village level.
4. Every Gram Sabha shan be competent to
safeguard and preserve the traditions
and customs of the people, their cultural
identity, community resources and the
customary mode of dispute resolution.
S. Every Gram Sabha shall(i) approve of the plans, programmes
and projects for social and economic development before they are
taken up for implementation by the
Panchayat at the village level; and
(ii) be responsible for the identification of beneficiaries under the
poverty alleviation and other
programmes.
6. Every Panchayat at the village level shall
be required to obtain from the Gram
Sabha a certification of utilisation of
funds for the above plans, programmes
and projects.
7. The reservation of seats in the Scheduled
Areas in every Panchayat shall be in
proportion to the population of the
communities for whom reservation is
sought to be given under Part IX of the
Constitution. However, the reservation
for the Scheduled Tribes shall not be
less than one-half of the total number of
seats. Further, all seats of Chairpersons
of Panchayats at ~all . 1evels shall be
reserved for the Scheduled Tribes.

394

(! Indian Polity
(iv) the power to ma nage village markets
(v) the powe r to exe rcise co nt rol ove r
mon ey le nd ing to th e Schedul ed
Tribes
(vi) th e power to exe rcise co ntro l over
in stitution s a nd functionari es in
all social sectors
(v ii ) the power to control local plans and
resources fo r such plans includin g
triba l sub-plans
14. The State Legislat ions shall contain safeguards to e nsure that Pan chaya ts at the
higher level do n ot assume the powers
a nd auth o rity of a ny Pan chayat a t the
lowe r leve l or of the Gram Sabha.
15. The Sta te Legis latu re sha ll e ndeavo ur to
follow the pattern of the Six th Schedul e
to the Co n stitution whi le de signin g
th e admini st rative arrangements in
the Pan chayats at d istrict levels in the
Sc heduled Areas.
16. Any provisio n of a ny law ( rel at ing to
Pan c haya ts in the Sc hedul ed Areas)
whi c h is in co n siste nt with the p rov is ion s of thi s Act shall cease to be in
force at the exp iry of o ne year fro m
the date o n whi c h this Act rece ives th e
asse nt of the President6 . However, all the
Pan chayats ex isting imm ediate ly before
such date shall co ntinu e till the expiry
of thei r term, unl ess disso lved by the
Sta te Legisla ture soon e r.

8. The sta tegovemment may nom in ate such

Scheduled Tribes wh ic h ha ve no repre·
senta tion in the Pan chayat at the inter·
mediate level or the Pan chaya t at the
distri ct leve l. But suc h nomination shall
not exceed o ne-te nth of the tota l mem·
be'rs to be elected in that Pan chayat.
9 . Th e Gra m Sa bha o r the Pa nc haya ts at
the appropriate leve l sh a ll be co nsulted
before mak ing the acqu isit io n of land
in the Scheduled Areas for development
projects and h efore resettling or rehabilitating perso ns affected by such proj ects
in the Sch eduled Areas. However, the
actua l planning and impl eme ntation of
the projects in the Schedul ed Areas sha ll
be coordinated at the state level.
10. Pla nning a nd management of minor
water bodies in th e Sc hedu led Areas
shall be e n trusted to Pan chaya ts a t the
appropriate level.
11. Th e recommendations of the Gram Sa bha
o r th e Pan chayats a t th e a ppropri ate
leve l sha ll be ma ndatory for grant of
prospectin g li ce nce or mining lease fo r
min or min era ls in the Schedul ed Areas.
12. Th e prior recommendation of the Gram
Sabha or the Panchayats at the a ppropriate level shall be mandatory for grant of
concess ion for t he exploitatio n of minor
min e ral s by a uction .
13. While e nd owi n g Pancha yats in the
Scheduled Areas with such powers a nd
authority as may be necessa ry to ena bl e
FINANCES OF PANCHAYATI RAJ
them to fun ction as in stitu tions of 1:i elfgovernmen t, a Sta te Legi sla ture shall
The Second Admi nistrative Reforms Co mmisensure that the Panchayats at the a pprosion of Indi a (2005- 2009) ha s summarized
priate level and the Gram Sa bha are
the sources of revenue of th e Pa nchayati Raj
endowed specifica lly withInstitution s (P Rl s) a nd the ir financia l prob(i) the power to e nforce prohibition or
le ms in the following way7:
to regulate or restri ct the sa le and
1. A major porti o n of Part IX of the
consumption of any intoxicant
Con s titution d ea ls with s t ructural
(ii) th e owners hip of min o r forest
em powe rm e n t of th e PRIs but the real
produce
(iii) the power to prevent a liena tion
s.y.bi s Act received the assent of the President on
of land in the Schedul ed Areas
24 Dece mber, 1996.
and to take a ppropriate acti o n to
' Second Admini strat ive Reform s Commission ,
r(1~tQro ~py unl awfu ll y a lie nated
Government of India, Repo rt on Loca l Governance,
la nd of a Sch ed uled Tribe
2007, pp. 15 1- 154.

t

Panchayati Raj

stre ngth in terms of both autonomy
and efficiency of these institutions is
dependent on their financial position
(including their capacity to generate
own resources). In genera l, Panchayats
in our country receive funds in the following ways:
(i) Grants from the Union Government
based on the recommendations of
the Central Finance Commission as
per Article 280 of the Con stitutio n.
(ii) Devolution from the State
Government based on the recommendations of the State Finance
Commission as per Article 243-1.
(iii) Loan s / grants from th e State
Government.
(iv) Programme-specific allocation under
Centrall y Sponsored Schemes and
Additional Central Assista n ce.
(v) Interna l Resource Generation (tax
and non-tax).
2. Across the cou ntry, States have not given
adequate attention to fisca l empowerment of the Panchayats. The Panchayats
own resources are meager. Keraia,
Karnataka and Thmil Nadu are th e states
which are co nsidered to be progressive
in PRls empowermen t but even there,
the Panchayats are heavily dependent
on government gra n ts. One can draw the
following broad conclusions:
(i) Internal resource generatio n at the
Panchayat level is weak. This is
partly due to a th in tax doma in
a nd partly due to Panchayats own
reluctance in co ll ecting revenue.
(ii) Panchayats are heav il y dependent
on grants from Union and State
Governments.
(iii) A major portion of the grants both
from Union as weB as the State
Governments is scheme specific.
Panchayats have limited discretion and flexibility in incurring
expend iture.
(iv) In view of their own tight fiscal
position, State Governments are not
keen to devolve funds to Panchayats.

~ 395

(v) In most of th e critical Eleventh
Schedule matters like primary education, hea lthcare, water supply,
sanitation and minor irrigation
even now, it is the State Government
which is directly respon sible for
implementation of these programmes and hence expenditure.
(vi) Overall, a situation has been created
where Panchayats have responsibility but grossly inadequate
resources.
3. Though, in absolute terms, the quantum
of funds the Un ion / State Government
transfers to a Panchayat forms the major
component of its receipt, the PRJ's own
resource ge neration is the sou l behind
its financia l standi ng. It is not only a
question of resources; it is the existence
of a local taxation system which ensures
people's involvement in the affa irs of an
elected body. It also makes the institution accountable to its citizens.
4. In terms of own resource collection, the
Gram Panchayats are co mparatively in
a better position because they have a tax
domain of their own, while the other
two tiers are depe ndent only on tolls,
fees and non-tax revenue for generating
internal resources.
5. State Pan chayati Raj Acts have given
most of the taxat ion powers to Village
Panchayats. The revenue domai n of the
intermediate a nd District Panchayats
(both tax as well as non-tax) has been
kept much small er and remains co nfined to seco ndary areas like ferry se rvices, markets, water and co nserva ncy
services, registration of vehicles, cess on
stamp duty and a few others.
6. A study of various State Legislatio n s
indicates that a number of taxes, duties,
tolls and fees co me under the jurisdiction of the Village Panchayats. These
interalia include property / house tax,
profession tax, land tax /cess, taxes/tolls
on vehicles, e nterta inment tax / fees,
license fees, tax on non-agriculture land,
fee on registration of catt le, sanitation/

396

fJ

Indian Polity

dra in age/ co nserva ncy tax, water rate/
tax, lighting rate / ta~x, educatio n cess and
tax on fairs and festivals.

REASONS FOR INEFFECTIVE
PERFORMANCE
Even after co nferring the co nstitutio na l status
and protection through the 73rd Amendment
Act (1992), the performance of the Panch,ayati
Raj Institutions (PRIs) has n ot been satl sfac·
tory and not uptc the expected leve l. The various reasons for this sub-optim a l perform.ance

arc as [0110w58 :

1. Lack of adequate devolution: Mnny
States have not taken adequate steps to
devolve 3Fs (i.e., functions, funds a nd
fu ncti o n ar ies) to the PRls to enab le
t hem to d ischnrge the ir const itutionally st ipul ated fu nction. Further, it is
imperative that the PRls ha ve resources
to matc h the respo nsibilitie s entrusted
to them. Wl1ile SFCs (state finance co mmissions) have submitted their recomme ndation s, not ma ny fe w States have
imp lemented these or taken steps to
ensure the fisca l viability of the PRls.
z. Excessive control by bureaucracy: In
so me States, the Gra m Pan chayats have
been placed in a position of s ubordination. Hen ce, the Gram Panchayat
Sa rpan chcs have to spend cxtTaordinary
amou nt o f time visiting Block Offices
for funds and / or technical approval.
These in teractions with thc Block staff
office distort the role of Sarpa nches as
elected representatives.
3. Tied nature offunds: This has two implications. The act ivities stated u nder a certain scheme a re not a lways appropriate
for all parts of the district. This results
in uns uitabl e activities being promoted
or an under-spend of the funds.

8l\'linistry of Panchayati Raj, GovC01 mcnt of India,
Rondmap forthe l~ill1 ch .. y.. ti Rnj (2011- 16), pp. J 1- 12,
23 and 7-8.

4. Overwhelming dependency on government
fundin e: A review of money received a nd
OWI1 source funds shows the oven\'helmi ng
depe ndence of Panchayats on government
fund ing. When Panchayats do not raise
resources and instead receive funds from
outside, people are less likely to request a
socia l a udit.
5. Reluctance to use fi scal powers: An
important power devolved to GP (Gram
Pan chayat) is the right to levy tax o n
property, business, mnrkcts, fairs and
a lso for services provided, like street
lighting or public toilets, etc. Very few
Panc hayats usc the ir fisca l power to
levy a nd co ll ect tHxes. The argument
pushed by Panchayat heads is that it is
difficult to lev y tax all your own co nstitue ncy, espec ia ll y whe n yo u li ve in
the community.
6. Status of the Gram Sabha: Empowering
th e Gram Sab has could have becn a
powerfu l weapon for transparency,
accountability and for in vo lvement of
the margina lized sectio n s. However, a
num ber of the Sta te Acts have not spelt
the powers of Greim Sabhas nor have
any procedures been laid down for the
function i ng of these bodies o r penalti es
for t he officia ls.
7 . Creation of Parallel Bodies: Often,
Parallel Bodies (PBs) are created for
supposed ly speedy implementation a nd
greater accountability. However, there
is little evidence to show that such PBs
have avoided the evils including that of
partisa n politi cs, sha rin g of spo il s, co rruption and e lite ca pture. Missions (in
parti cular) often bypassing mainstream
programmes, create disconnect, duality,
and a lienat ion between the ex isting and
the new structures and functions. PBs
usurp the legit imate space of PRls and
demorali ze the PRIs by virtu e of the ir
su perior resource endowments.
8 . Poor Infrastructure: A number of Gram
Panclwyats in the co untry do not have
even fu ll time Secretary and al so ba sic

Panchayati Raj

office bu ildings. The database for p lann ing, monitoring etc., are lacking in
most of the cases.
A large number of elected representatives of PRIs arc semi-literate or illiterate

Table 39.2

Definitions

243A.

Gram Sabha

2438.

Constitution of panchayats

243C.

Composition of panchayats

r- 2~3E.
i

SubJect.matter

243.

2430.

[
I

243H.

I
1

Reservation of seals

-

I

Duration of panchayats, and so on

243F.

..
243G.

and know little about their roles & respon.sibilities, programmes, procedures, systems. Often for want of good, relevant
and periodic training, they are not able
to perform their functions properly.

Articles Related to Panchayats at a Glance

Article No

t

~ 397

- -. ..

Disqualifications for membership
Powers, authority and responsibilities of panchayats

1

Powers to impose taxes by, and funds of, the panchayats

~.

[

243·1.

Constitution of finan ce commission to review fina ncial position

243J.

Audit of accounts of panchayats

243K.

Elections to the panchayats

[i 3M.

I

2431.

Application to union territories

4

Part not to apply to certain areas

243N.

Continuance of eXisting laws and panchayats

243-0.

Bar to interference by courts in electoral maners

Table 39,3

CommIttees Related to Panchayati Raj (After Constitutionalisation)

51 No

1.

I
r

2.
3.
4.

5.

Name of the Committee

Chairman

Appointed In

Reported In

Task Force on Devolution of Powers and
Functions to Panchayatl Raj Institutions

Lalit Mathur

2001

2001

Expert Group on Planning al the Grassroots Level

V. Ramachandran

2005

2006

Task Force for Preparation of a Manua l for
District Planning

Smt. RaJwant
Sandhu

2008

2008

Committee on Restructuring of DRDA (District
Rural Development Agency)

V. Ramachandran

20 10

2012

Expert Committee on Leveraging Panchayats for
Efficient Delivery of Public Goods and Services

Mani Shankar Alyar

20 12

2013

I



CHAPTER

40

he term 'Urban Local Government'
in India signifies the governance of
an urban area by the people through
their elected representatives. The jurisdiction
of an urban local government is limited to a
specific urban area which is demarcated for
this purpose by the state government l ,
There are eight types of urban local governments in India-m unicipal corporation,
municipality, notified area committee, town
area committee, cantonment board, township,
port trust and special purpose agency.
The system of urban government was
constitutionalised through the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act of 1992. At the Central
level, the subject of 'urban local government'
is dealt with by the following three ministries:
(i) Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs
(ii) Ministry of Defence in the case of cantonment boards
(iii) Ministry of Home Affai rs in t he case of
Union Territories

T

l EVOLUTION OF URBAN BODIES
Historical Perspective
The institutions of urban local government
originated and developed in modern India
during the period of British rule. The major
events in this context are as follows:
0) In 1688, the first municipal corporation in India was set up at Madras. It
must be noted here that a Charter for
l'Locai Government' is a subject mentioned in the
State List under the 7th Schedule of the Constitution.

Municipalities

the establishment of the Municipal
Corporation of Madras was issued on
30th December 1687. However, the corporation came into existence on 29th
September 1688.
(ii) In 1726, the municipal corporations
were set up in Bombay and Calcutta.
(iii) Lord Mayo's Resolution of ] 870 on financia l decentral isation visualised the
development of local self-government
institutions.
(iv) Lord Ripon's Resolution of 1882 has
been hailed as the 'Magna Carta' of
local self-government. He is called
the father of loca l-self government in
India.
(v) The Royal Comm ission on decentralisation was appointed in ] 907 and it subm itted its report in 1909. Its chairman
was C.E.H. Hobhouse.
(vi) Under the dyarchicaJ scheme introduced
in Provinces by the Government of
India Act of 1919, local self-government
became a transferred subject under
the charge of a respo n sible Indian
minister.
(vii) In 1924, the Cantonments Act was
passed by the Centra l legislature.
(viii) Under the provincial autonomy scheme
introduced by the Government ofIndia
Act of 1935, local self-government was
declared a prov incial subject.

Committees and Commissions
The comm ittees and commissions apPOinted
by the Centra l Government to improve the

Mun;cipalities
Table 40.1
SI No

'ti 399

Committees and Commissions on Urban Local Governments
Year

Name of the Commi ttee I Commi ssion

Chairm an

fun ctioni ng of urban local gover nmen ts are
menti oned in 'Table 40.1.

Const itutio nal Ame ndm e nt Act of 1992 and
ca me into force on 1 June 1993 z.

Cons tituti onali sation

t 74TH AMENDMENT ACT OF 1992

Rajiv Gand hi Gover nmen t In Augus t 1989,
the Rajiv Gandh i gover nmen t introd uced the
65th Con stitut ional Amen dme nt Bill ( Le.,
Nagar palika Bill) in the Lok Sabha . The bill
aimed at streng thenin g and revam ping th e
muni cipal bodie s by confe rring a consti tutiona l status on the m . Altho ugh the bill was
passed in the Lok Sabha , it was defeat ed in
the Rajya Sabha in Octob er 1989 and h en ce,
lapsed .
V. P. Singh Gove rnmen t The Natio nal Front
Gover nmen t unde r V P Singh introd u ced the
revised Nagar palika Bill in the Lok Sabha
again in Septe mber 1990. However, the bill
was not passed and finally lapsed due to the
dissol ution of the Lok Sabha .
Naras imha Rao Gover nmen t P V Naras imha
Rao Gover nmen t also introd uced the modi fied Munic ipaliti es Bill in the Lok Sabha in
Septe mber 1991. It finally emerg ed as the 74th

This Act has added a new Part IX-A to the Constituti on of India. This part is entitle d as 'The
Muni cipali ties' a nd con sists of provis ions
from Articl es 243-P to 243-ZG. In additi on,
the act h as also added a new T\velft h Sched ul e
to the Con stituti on. This sched ule co ntain s
eighte en fun ctiona l items of munic ipaliti es.
It dea ls with Articl e 243-W.
The act gave consti tution al status to the
mun icipal ities. It has broug ht them under
the purvie w of justic iable part of th e Con stitution . In other ·words, state gover nm ents are
unde r con stituti onal obliga tion to adopt the
new system of munic ipalit ies in accor dance
with the provis ions of the act.
11.e bill was passed in both the Lok Sabha and the
Rajya Sabha in Decem ber 1992. After that, the bill was
appro~ by the required numbe r of state legislatures.
It was assented by the President in April 1993.

400 ;

Indian Pality

The act a ims at rev italisin g a nd strengthening the urban governm ents so that they function effectively as units of local government.

Salient Features
The salie n t features of the act are:
Three Types of Municipalities T h e act provides for the co nstitution of the following
th ree types of mu nic ipa lities in eve ry state.
1. A nagar panchayat (by whatever nam e
ca lled) for a transitiona l area 3 ,
2 . A municipal cou ncil for a smaller urban

area.

3. A municipal corporatio n fo r a larger urban
area.
But, there is one exception. If there is an
urban area where municipal services are being
provided by an industrial establishm ent, then
the governor may specify that area to be a n
industrial township. In such a casc, a mun icipality may not be constituted.
Th e governor has to sp eci fy a transiti onal
area, a small er urban a rea or a la rger u rban
area, keeping in view th e following factors:
(a) Popu lation of th e area.
(b) Density of the population therein.
(c) Revenue generated for local administratio'n .
(d) Percentage of e mployment In nonagricultu ra l activi ti es.
(e) Eco nomic importance.
(f) Such other factors as he/ she may dee m fit.
Composition All the m embers of a muni cipality shall be elected directly by the peop le
of the municipa l a rea. For this purpose, each
muni cip al area shall b e divi ded into terri torial co nstituencies to be known as wards. The
state legislature may provide the mann er of
elect ion of the chairperso n of a municipality.
It may a lso provide fOT the representation of
the fo llowing perso ns in a municipality.
1. Persons hav ing special knowledge or
experience in muni cipal ad ministration
without the r ight to vote in the meetings
of mun ic ipality.
3A transitional area mea ns an area which is in
transition fro m a rural area to an urba n area.

2. The members of the Lok Sa bha and the
state legislati ve asse mbl y represe nting
co n st ituen cies tha t compri se wholl y or
partly the municipal a rea.
3. The members of the Raj ya Sabha and the
state leg islati ve cou n cil reg istered as
electo rs within the muni cipa l area.
4. The chairperso ns of co mmittees (o ther
than wa rds com mittees).
Wards Committees There sha ll be co n stituted a wards committee, co nsisting of on e
or more wards, within the territorial area of
a muni cipa lity having population of three
lakh o r more. The state legislatu re may make
provision w;th respect to the co mposition and
the territoria l area ofa wards com mittee a nd
the mann er in which the seats in a wards
co mmittee sha ll be filled.
Other Committees in addit io n to the wards
co mmittees, the state leg is lat ure is a lso
all owed to make any provision fo r the co n st itution of other committees. The chairperso n s
of such co mmittees may be made m embers
of th e muni cipa li ty.
Reservation of Seats The act provides for the
reservation of seats for the scheduled castes
and the scheduled tribes in every municipality
in proportion of their population to the total
population in the municipal area. Further, it
provides for the reservation of not less than
on e-third of th e total numbe r of seats fo r
women (including the number of seats reserved
for women belonging to the SCs and the S1S).
Th e state legislature may provide for the
manner of rese rvation of offi ces of cha irperson s in the municipali ties for SCs, STS a nd
wome n. It may also make any provision for
the reservation of seats in any municipality
or offices of cha irpersons in municipa lities
in favour of ba ckwa rd c1asses.
The reservation of seats as well as the
reserva ti on of offices of cha irperso ns in the
municipalities for the sc hedul ed castes a nd
scheduled tribes shall cease to have effect
after the expiration of the period specified in
Article 334 (whi ch is prese ntly eighty years,
that is, till 2030).

401
Duration of 'Mu n icl lities The act provides for a five-year .rm of office for every
muni cipality from the date of it's fi rst meeting. However, it can be dissolved before the
compl etio n of its term. Further, the fresh
elections to constitute a municipality shall be
completed (a) before the expiry of its duration of fi ve years; or (b) in case of dissolution,
before the expiry of a p eriod of six months
from the date of its di ssolution.
But, where the remainder of the period
(for which the dissolved municipality would
have co ntinued) is less than six months, it
shall not be necessary to h old any election for
constituting the new municipality for such
p eriod .
Moreover, a municipality constituted upon
the dissolution of a municipality before the
expiration of its duration shall continue only
for the remainder of the period for which the
di ssolved municipality would have continu ed
had it n ot been so dissolved. In other words,
a municipality reconstituted after premature
dissolution does not enjoy the full period of
five years but remains in office onl y for the
remainder of the period.
The act also makes two more provisions
with respect to dissolution: (a) a municipality
must be given a reasonable opportunity of
being h ea rd before its di ssolution; and (b) no
am endm ent of any law for the time b eing in
force shall cause dissolution of a muni cipality
b efore the expiry of the five yea rs term .
Disqualifications A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as or for being a member
of a municipality if he/ she is so disqualified
(a) under any law for the time being in force
for the purposes of elections to the legislature of
the state con cerned; or (b) under any law made
by the state legislature. However; no person shall
be disqualified on the ground that he/ she is less
than 2S years of age if h e/ she has attained the
age of 2l years. Further, aU questions of disqualifications shall be referred to such authority as
the state legislature determines.
St ate Election Commission The superintenden a; direction and control of the preparation

of electoral rolls and the conduct of an elections
to the municipalities shall be vested in the state
election commission.
The state leg isla ture may make provision
with respect to all matters relating to elections to the municipalities.
Powers and Functions The state legislature
may e ndow the municipalities with such
powers and authority as may be n ecessary
to enable them to function as institutions of
self-government. Such a scheme may co ntain
provisions for the devolution of powers and
responsibilities upon muni ci palities at the
a ppropriate level with respect to (a) the preparation of pl ans for econo mi c development
and social justice and (b) the implementation
of schemes for economic development and
social justice as may b e entrusted to them,
including those in relation to the eighteen
matters listed in the 'IWelfth Schedule.
Finances The state legislatu re may (a) authorise a municipality to levy, collect and appropriate taxes, duties, tolls and fees; (b) assign to
a municipality taxes, duties, tolls and fees levied
and collected by state government; (c) provide
for making grants-in-aid to the municipalities
from the consolidated fund of the state; and
(d) provide for constitution of funds for crediting all moneys of the municipalities.
Fi nance Commission The finance com mission (which is constituted for the panchayats)
shall also, for every five years, review the
fin ancial position of municipalities and make
recommendations to the governor as to:
1. The principles that should govern:
(a) The distribution between th e sta te
a nd the municipalities of the net
proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls
and fees levi ed by the state and
allocatio n of sh a res amongst the
municipalities at all levels.
(b) The determination of th e taxes,
duties, tolls and fees that may be
ass igned to the municipalities.
(c) The grants-in-aid to the municipali·
ties from the co nsolidated fund of
the state.

402 /(I,ndion Polity
2, The mea sures needed to imp rove th e
fina ncia l pos itio n of the mun iCipa li ties.
3. Any other matter referred to it by the gov.
ernor in the interests of sou nd finance
of m u nicipa li ties.
T he governor sha ll place the recomme nda·
tions of the co mmission a long wi t h th e actio n
taken report b efo re the state legislature.
The centra l fina n ce com m ission sha ll a lso
suggest t he measures n eeded to a ugment the
consol idated fund of a state to supp le m ent
the resou rces of the m unicipalities in the
state (on th e bas is of th e reco m me n dat ions
made by t h e fin ance commission of t h e
state).
Audit of Accounts The state legislature may
make p rovisions with respect to the ma inte·
nance of accounts by m un icipa lities and th e
a udit ing of such accou nts.
Applicat ion to Un ion Territories The provi·
sions of this p<lrt arc a p p licable to the Un ion
terr itories. Howeve r, the President may direct
that they would a p ply to a Union territory
subject to such except ions a nd mod ificat ion s
as h e/sh e may specify.
In exercise of the above power, t he Pres i·
dent (i n 2001) directed that the provisions of
Article 243ZD (Committee for d istrict pla n ·
n ing) and 243ZE (Com mi ttee for metropoli·
tan planning) sha l1 not apply to t he Nat iona l
Capita l Territory of Delhi.
Exempted Areas The act does not a ppl y to
the schedul ed areas a n d triba l areas in th e
states 4 . It shall a lso not affect t h e fu nctions
and powers of t he Da rjeeli ng Gorkha Hill
Cou n ci l of t he West Be ngal.
H owever, the Parli ame n t may extend t he
provis ions of this part to the scheduled areas

4At present, ten states ofI ndia have scheduled areas.

These are: Andhra Pradesh, Thlangana, Jha rkhand,
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa and Rajasthan.
Presently, there arc a total of le n tribal areas (auto·
nomous districts) in the four states of Assam (3),
Megha\aya (3), 1tipura (I ) and Mizoram (3).

a nd tribal areas subj ect to such exceptions
and modification s as it may specify.
District Planning Committee Every state
sha ll constitute at t he district level, a d istrict
plan n ing com m ittee to co nsoli date the plans
prepared by pa nch ayats and m u n icipa lities
in th e district, and to prepare a draft deve lop ment p lan for the district as a wh ole. The
state legislature may make provisio ns with
respect to the following:
] . Th e compositio n of suc h committees;
2. The ma n ner of e lectio n of members of
such comm ittees;
3. Th e functions of such com mittees in rela·
tion to di strict planning; a nd
4. Th e ma n ner of til e e lection of the chair·
persons of such committees.
T he act lays down that four·fifth s of the
members of a dist ri ct planning comm ittee
sho uld be elected by the e lected membe rs of
the di strict panchayat and m u n icipalities in
the d istrict from amongst them sel ves. T he
re presentat ion of these members i n the co m·
mittee shou ld be in proport io n to t he ratio
betwee n the rura l and urban popu latio ns in
the di strict.
In prepa ring the draft developme n t plan, a
district p lanning committee sha ll have regHTd
to(i) matters of com mo n in terest between
the Panchayats and the Mu n icipalities
including spat ial plann ing, sharing of
wate r and other physica l and nat ural
resources, t he i ntegrated developme n t
of i nfrast ru ctu re and e n vi ronmenta l
co nse rvation and
(ii) the exte nt a nd type of avai lab le resources
whether financia l or otherwise.
Further, t he co m mittee sha ll also co nsu lt
such inst itu tio ns and organ isat ions as th e
Govern or may specify.
T h e cha irperson of a Distri ct Planning
Comm ittee sh all forward th e development
p lan to the state govern ment.
Metropolitan Pl a nn ing Committee Every
metropol ita n area sha ll have a metropoli·
ta n pla n ning committee to prepare a draft

Munkipalrues

development plan 5. The state legislature may
make provisions with respect to the following:
1. The composition of such committees;
2. The manner of election of members of
such committees;
3. The representation in such committes of
the Central government, state government and other organisations;
4. The functions of such committees in relation to planning and coordination for
the metropolitan area; and
5. The manner of election of chairpersons
of such committees.
The act lays down that two-thirds of the
members of a metropolitan planning committee should be elected by the elected members
of the municipalities and chairpersons of the
panchayats in the metropolitan area from
amongst themselves. The representation of
these members in the committee should be in
proportion to the ratio between the population
of the municipalities and the panchayats in
that metropolitan area.
In preparing the draft development plan, a
metropolitan planning committee shall have
regard to-

Ci) the plans prepared by the Municipalities
and the Panchayats in the Metropolitan
area;
(ii) matters of common interest between
the MunicipaJities and the Panchayats,
including coordinated spatial planning
of the area, sharing of water and other
physical and natural resources, the integrated development of infrastructure
and environmental conservation;
(iii) the overall objectives and priorities set
by the Government of India and the
government of the state and
(iv) the extent and nature of investments
likely to be made in the Metropolitan
area by agencies of the Government
of India and of the Government of the
State and other available resources
whether financial or otherwise.
5Metropolitan area meansanarea havinga population
of 10 lakh or more, in one or more districts and
consisting of two or more municipalities or
panchayats or other contiguous areas.

~, 403

Further, the committee shall also consult
such institutions and organisations as the
Governor may specify.
The chairperson of a Metropolitan Planning
Committee shall fonvard the development plan
to the state government.
Continuance of Existing laws and Municipalities All the state laws relating to municipalities shall continue to be in force until the
expiry of one year from the commencement
of this act. In other words, the states have to
adopt the new system of municipalities based
on this act within the maximum period of
one year from 1 June, 1993, which is the date
of commencement of this act. However, all
municipalities existing immediately before the
commencement of this act shalI continue till
the expiry of their tenn, unless dissolved by the
state legislature sooner.
Bar to Interference by Courts in Electoral
Matters The act bars the interference by
courts in the electoral matters of municipalities. It declares that the validity of any law
relating to the delimitation of constituencies
or the allotment of seats to such constituencies
cannot be questioned in any court. it further
lays down that no election to any municipality
is to be questioned except by an election petition presented to such authority and in such
manner as provided by the state legislature.
Twelfth Schedule It contains the following
18 functional items placed within the purview
of municipalities:
1. Urban planning including town planning;
2. Regulation ofland use and construction
of buildings;
3. Planning for economic and social
development;
4. Roads and bridges;
5. Water supply for domestic, industrial and
commercial purposes;
6. Public health, sanitation, conservancy
and solid waste management;
7. Fire services;
8. Urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of ecological
aspects;

!

404 ,~ Indian Polity
9. Safeguarding the inte rests of weaker section s of society, including the handicapped and menta ll y retarded;
10. Slum improvement and upgra dation ;
11. Urban pove rty a lleviation ;
12. Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, gardens, playgrounds;
13. Promotion of cultural , educat ional and
aesth etic aspects;
14. Burials and burial gro unds, cremations
and cre mation grounds and e le ctric
crematoriums;
15. Ca ttl e ponds, preve ntion of cruelty to
a nimal s;
16. Vital statist ics including reg istrat ion of
births a nd dea th s;
17. Public amenities induding street lighting,
parking lots, bus stops and publi c conveniences; and
18. Regulation o f sla ugh te r hou ses an d
tanneries.

TTYPES OF URBAN

l GOVERNMENTS

The following e igh t t yp es of urba n lo ca l
bodies are created in India for the administra·
tion of urban areas;
• Municipal Corporation
• Municipality
• Not ifi ed Area Committee
• Town Area Committee
• Ca nto nm e nt Board
• Town ship
• Port Trust
• Spec ia l Purpose Agen cy

II IMunicipal Corporation
Municipal corporatio ns are crea ted for the
administra tion of big cities like Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Hyderabad, Banga lo re and others,
They are established in the states by the acts
of the co nce rned state legislatures, and in the
union territories by the acts of the Parliament
of India. There may be onc common act for
al1 th e municipal corporatio ns in a state or a
separate act for each municipal corporation.

A munici pal co rporation has three authoriti es, na me ly, the cou n cil, the stan din g committees a nd th e co mmi ssio n e r.
The Cou n c il is th e delibe rati ve and legislative wing of the co rpora tion . It co nsists
of th e Coun c illors directly e lected by th e
peo ple, as well as a few nominated persons
havin g kn owledge or expe ri ence of muni ci pa l
ad mini stration . In brief, the co mposition of
the Co unc il induding the rese rvatio n of seats
for SCs, STh and wo me n is gove rned by the
74th Const itu tional Ame ndment Act.
The Cou nc il is headed by a Mayor. He/ she
is assisted by a Deputy Mayor. The mayor is
e lected in a majority of th e states for a o neyea r renewable te rm. He/ she is basica lly an
ornamental figure a nd a for mal head of the
co rpora tion . Hi s/ h e r main function is to
presi de over the meetings of the Co un cil.
The sta nding co mmittees are c rea ted to
fac ilitate the working of the coun ci l, which is
too large in size. They deal with publi c works,
education, h ea lth, taxatio n , fi na n ce and so
on. Th ey take decisions in their fields.
The municipal com mi ss ion er is responsibl e for th e impl eme ntation of t he decisio ns ta ken by the cou ncil a nd its sta ndin g
co mmittees. Thus, he/ she is the chi ef executi ve a uth ority of the corporation. He/ sh e is
appointed by th e state government a nd is
generally a member of the lAS.

!I IMunicipality
The muni c ipa lities are esta bl ished fo r the
administration of towns a nd sma ll er c iti es.
Like the corporations, they are a lso set up
in the states by the acts of the co n ce rn ed
sta te legi slatu res and in the union territories by the acts of the Parliament of India .
They are a lso known by various oth er n ames
like muni c ipa l cou n ci l, muni c ipa l com mittee, muni c ipa l board, borough muni c ipa l ity,
city muni c ipality an d others.
Like a muni cipal co rpora tion , a munici pality a lso ha s three authorities, n a m ely, the
co un c il, the sta nding co mmittees and t he
chi ef executive officer.

Municipalities

The council is the deliberative and legisla.
tive wing of the municipality. It consists of
the council1ors directly elected by the people.
The council is headed by a president/chairman. He/she is assisted by a vi(»presidenUvi(»
chainnan. He/she presides over the meetings of
the council. UnHke the Mayor of a municipal
corporation, he/she plays a significant role and
is the pivot of the municipal administration.
Apart from presiding over the meetings of the
Council, he/she enjoys executive powers.
The standing committees are created to
facilitate the working of the council. They
deal with public works, taxation, health,
finance and so on.
The chief executive officer/chief municipal
officer is responsible for day-to-day general
administration of the municipality. He/she
is appointed by the state government.

II INotified Area Committee

,
J,

A notified area committee is created for the
administration of two types of areas-a fast
developing town due to industrialisation,
and a town which does not yet fulfil all the
conditions necessary for the constitution of a
municipality, but which otherwise is considered
important by the state government. Since it is
established by a notification in the government
gazette, it is called as notified area committee.
Though it functions within the framework of
the State Municipal Act, only those provisions
of the act apply to it which are notified in the
government gazette by which it is created. It
may also be entrusted to exercise powers under
any other act. Its powers are almost equivalent to those of a municipality. But unlike the
municipality, it is an entirely nominated body,
that is, all the members of a notified area committee including the chairman are nominated
by the state government. Thus, it is neither an
elected body nor a statutory body.

El lTown Area Committee
A town area committee is set up for the admin·istration of a small town. It is a semi-municipal
authority and is entrusted with a limited number of civic functions like drainage, roads, street
lighting and conservancy. It is created by a

~ 405

separate act of a state legislature. Its composition, fun ctions and other matters are governed
by the act. It may be wholly elected or wholly
nominated by the state government or partly
elected and partly nominated6 .

II ICantonment Board
A cantonment board is established for municipal administration for civilian population
in the cantonment area 7 . It is set up under
the provisions of the Cantonments Act of
2006-a legislation enacted by the Central
government. It works under the administrative control of the defence ministry of the
Central government. Thus, unlike the above
four types of urban local bodies, which are
created and administered by the state government, a cantonment board is created as well
as administered by the Central government.
The Cantonments Act of 2006 was enacted
to consolidate and amend the law relating
to the administration of cantonments with
a view to impart greater democratisation,
improvement of their financial base to make
provisions for developmental activities and
for matters connected with them. This Act
has repealed the Cantonments Act of 1924.
At present, there are 62 cantonment boards
in the country. They are grouped into four
categories on the basis of the civil population.
This is shown in Thble 40.2.
Table 40.2

Classification of Cantonment Boards

Category

Civil Population
Above 50.000

II

10,000 to 50.000

III

2,500 to 10,000

IV

Below 2.500

E>rrhe Rural-Urban Relationship Committee (196366) headed by A.P. Jain recommended that small
town area committees should be merged with the
panchayati raj institutions to avoid multiplicity in
the pattern of local bodies.
7A cantonment area is a delimited area where the
military forces and troops are pennanently stationed.

406

,f!'

Indian Pality

A ca nto nm en t boa rd co n s ists of partly
e le cte d a nd partly n o m inated mem bers.
Th e e lected members ho ld offi ce fo r a term
of fi ve yea rs whil e t h e n omin ated me m bers
( Le. , ex-o ffi cio m e m bers) con t inu e so lo ng
as th ey h old th e offi ce in t hat sta ti o n . Th e
mil itary offi cer co m ma ndi ng the station
is the ex-offi cio p res ident of th e board an d
presides ove r its meetings. The vice-president
of th e b oa rd is elected by t he elected m e mpers fro m a m on gst themselves for a term of
five years.
Th e Catego ry I canton ment hoa rd consists
of th e fo llowing m embe rs:
(i) A mil itary offi cer com mand ing the
statio n
(ii) An executive engi neer in the ca ntonmen t
(iii) A health office r in the can ton me nt
(iv) A fi rst class magistrate nom in ated by the
di strict magi strate
(v) Three mili tary office'rs nominated by the
offi ce r comm a ndin g the station
(vi) Eigh t members el ected by the peo pl e of
the ca n tonm e nt a rea
(vii) Ch ief Executive Officer of t he ca n to nfictH board
The fu n ctions p e rfor m ed by a ca n ton ment board are sim il a r to t hose of a m un ic ipa li ty. These are statutor il y ca tego ri se d
i nto ob liga tory fun ction s a n d di sc ret ion a ry
fu n ctio n s. T h e sou rces of in come includes
both, tax revenue a n d no n-tax reve n ue.
Th e executive officer of the ca n ton ment
b oa rd is app oin ted by the President ofI nd ia.
He/ she impl em ents all the resolu tion s a n d
decision s of the boa rd a n d its committees.
He/she belongs to t he cen t ra l ca dre establi shed for the pu r pose.

mi lTownship
Th is type of urba n government is established
by the large p ubli c e n ter prises to prov ide
civ ic a m e ni t ies to i ts staff a n d wor kers
wh o live i n the housi n g colonie s bu il t n ear
th e p lant. T h e enterp ri se a p po in ts a town
ad m inistrator to look a ft er th e a dm ini st ration of t he town sh ip. He/ sh e is ass isted by

some e ngin ee rs a nd oth e r techn ica l and n ontechn ical staff. T h us, the town sh ip for m of
urban gove rnm e n t has no e le cted memb e rs.
In fact, it is a n exte ns io n of t h e bu reallcrati c
st ru cture of the e n te r p ri se.

II IPort Tr ust
The port t ru sts are esta bl ished in th e port
area s li ke Mumbai, Kolkata, Ch e nn a i and
so on for two purposes: (a) to ma nage a nd
protect t he ports; a nd (b) to provid e c iv ic
a me niti es. A port tru st is c rea ted by a n Act
of .Pa rli a me n t. It con sists o f both e lected
a nd nom inated me m bers. Its cha irma n is an
offic ia l. Its c ivic fu nct io ns arc more or ress
s imil ar to t hose of a m u n ici pa lity.

III ISpecial Purpose Allency
In addition to th ese seven area-based urban
bod ies (or m ulti purpose agen c ies) , t he states
have set up certa in agen c ies to u nde rta ke
des ignated act ivities or specifi c fu n ct ions·
that ' legit im ate ly ' belong to th e do ma in of
muni c ipa l co rporatio n s or m unicipal ities
or other loca l u rba n gove rnm ents. In otb e r
wo rds, t hese a re fu nct ion-based a nd not a re aba sed. T hey are kn own as 'si ngle pu rp ose' ,
'u ni-purpose' or 'specia l pu rpose' a gen cies
or 'functiona l local bod ies'. Som e su ch bodies are:
I. Town im proveme n t t rusts.
2. Urban developm en t a uthor ities.
3. Wa ter supp ly a nd sewe rage boards.
4. Hou sing boards.
5. Poll ut io n co ntro l boards.
6. Elec tri c ity supp ly boards.
7. City t ransport boa rds.
Th ese fun ctiona l loca l bod ies a re establi shed as statu tory bodies by a n act of 'sta te
legi sla ture or as departme nts by a n executtve
re solu tio n . T hey functi on as autonom ous
bod ies and dea l with the functio·n s a llotted
to th em inde penden tly of th e loca l urba n
governm e n ts, th at is, munici pa l corpora tion s
or m unic ipa lities a nd so forth. Thus, t hey are
not subordinate age nc ies of t he loca l mun ic ipa l bodies.

Municipalities

~ MUNICIPAL PERSONNEL
There arc three types of municipal personnel
systems in India. The personn el working in
the urban governm en ts may belong to any
on e or all the three types. These are

••

~ 401

Hyderabad and Mumbai) set up in 1968
on the recommendation of Nur·ud-din
Ahm ed Co mmitt ee ort Trai nin g of
Municipal Employees (1963-1965)
4. National In stitute of Urban Affairs (New
Delhi ), establish ed in 1976
5. Human Settlement Managemen't Institute
(New Delh i), established in 1985

1. Separate Personnel System: Under this sys- ..
tern , each local body appoints, administers,
and co ntrol s its own personnel. They a rc not
transfe'rable to other local bodies. It is the
most widely prevale-n t system. This system ~ MUNICIPAL REVENUE
upholds the principl e oflaca} autonomy and
There are five source's of income of th e urban
promotes undivided loyalty.
local bodies. These are as fol1ows:
1. 'Thx Revenue: The revenue from the local
2. Unified Personnel System: In this system,
taxes include prope'rty tax, entert::!. inthe state government apPoints, admin'isteTs,
ment tax, taxes on advertisements, pro·
and control s the municipal pe rso nn el. In
fessional
tax, water tax, tax on a ni mals,
other words, state-wide services (ca dres) are
lighting tax, pilgrim tax, market tax, to1l
created for all th e urban bodies in the state.
on
new bridges and so on. In addition,
They arc transferable between the loca l bodies
the municipal bodies imposes various
in th e sta te. This syste'm is preval ent in
cesses like Hbrary cess, educatio n cess,
Andhra Pradesh, Thmil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh,
beggary
cess a nd so on. Property tax is
Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and so on.
the most important tax revenue.
3. Integrated Personnel System: Under this
2. Non-Tax Revenue: This source include
rent on municipal properties, fees and
system, the personnel of th e sta te government
and those ofthe local bodies form part of the
fines, roya lty, profits and di vidends,
same service. In other words, the muni cipal
intere'st, user charges and miscellaneous
personnel are the members of the state se r~
receipts. The user charges ( i. e., pay·
vi ces. They are tran sferable not only b etween
ment for public' utiliti es) include water
the local bodies in the state but a1's o between
charges, sa nitation ch a rges, sewerage
local bodies and de partments of state govern·
charges and so on.
3. Grants:, Th ese include the various grants
ment. Thus, there is no di stin ction between
local civil se rvi ce a nd state civi l service.
given to monicipal bodies by the Central
and State Govem'ments for several develThi's system is prevalent in Odisha, Bihar,
Karna ta ka, Punjab, Haryana and others.
opment programmes, infrast ru cture
The various national level institutions prosch em es, urba'n . reform initiatives and
viding training' to th e municipal personnel
so on.
are
4. Devolution: Thi's con sists of the transfer
1. All·India ln s titute of Loc-al Self·
of funds to the urban local bodies fro'm
Government (M umbai ) constituted in
the state government. This devol ution is
1927; it is a private registered society
made on the basis of the recommenda2. Centre for Urba n and Environmenta l
tion'S of'th e state finan ce commission ~
Stud i"es (New Delhi ) set up in 1967
5. Loans: The urban' local bodies ra ise loans
o n the reco mmend atio n of Nur-udfrom th e state govern'mertt as well as
din Ahmed Committee on Training of
financial institutions to meet their capital
Municipal Employees ( 1963- 1965)
expenditure. They can borrow from the
3. Regi o nal Ce ntre s for Urb a n a nd
ffncrncial in stitutions or other bodfes only
Environmental Studies (Kolkata, Lucknow,
with the approval of the state government.

408

:/!

Indian Polity

CENTRAL COUNCIL OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT
T he Centra l Co un cil of Loca l Governm e n t
was set up in 1954. It was constituted under
Article 263 of the Co nstitut ion of India by a n
orde r of t he Pres idc n t of In dia. Originally, it
was known as t he Centra l Cou nci l of Local
Se lf·Govern me n t. Howeve r, the te rm 'self·
governmen t' was fou nd to bc su perfluous a nd
he nce was rep laced by th e term 'government'
in the 1980s. Till 1958, it dea lt with both
u rban as we ll as rura l loca l governments, but
after 1958 it has been dealin g with matte rs of
urban loca l govern ment o nly.
T he Cou nc il is an advisory body. It consists
of the Mini ste r for Housi ng a nd Urba n Amlirs

Ta ble 40.3

in the Gove rn ment of lnd ia and the ministers
for loca l self-govern me nt in states. T he Uni on
min ister acts as the Chairman of the Council.
T he Co un c il pe rfor ms t he foll owing fun ction s with regard to locc:il govern me n t:
(i) Conside rin g a nd recom m ending t he
poli cy matte rs
(ii) Mak ing proposals for legislation
(iii) Exa mini ng t he poss ibi lity of coope ratio n between the Centre and the states
(iv) Drawi ng u p a co mm o n p rogramme of

action

(v) Recomme nd ing Central financia l
ass ista nce
(vi) Rev iewing t he work don e by the loca l
bo di es w i t h t h e Ce nt ra l f i na n c ia l
ass istance

Articles Related to Municipalities at a Glance

A rt icle No

.;,......--------

Su bJec t ·ma tter

243P

Definitions

243Q

CansUtuIIon 01 munJdplillies

243R

Composition of municipalities

2435

CansUtuIIon end

243T

Reservation of seats

243U

Durotton oIl11U111cfpo1111 ond SO on

po-

01 _ _ and SO on

[-~2~43W~:::~_
~;'.;;;rf\y
;i~i~~~~of~mu~nlClpaIItIei, end..., on
243V

Disqualifications for membership

243X

Powers to Impose taxes by, and funds of. the municipalities

. ----243Y
243Z

L---:2=43ZA
:;:..._

243ZC
24 3ZB

243Z0

Audit of accounts of municipalities

_

10 lIItt 1I1UIIIcIpiII_

ID_. . .

Application to union territories

Pert not 10

Committee for district planning

2432£

243ZG

24 3ZF

Continuance of existing laws and municipalities

Bar to Interference

courts In eIectonIl matters

In this Part...
41. Union Territories

CHAPTER

42. Scheduled and Tribal Areas

41

U

ndel Articl e 1 of the Const itutio n,
the territo ry of India comp rises three
catego ries of territo ries: (a) .t errito ries of the states ; (b) union territo ries; and
(c) territo ries that may be acqui red by the
Gover nmen t of India at any time. At prese nt,
there 3rc twent y-eigh t states, eight union territorie s and no acqui red territo ries.
The states are the memb ers of the federa l
system in India and share a distrib ution of
power with the Centr e. The union territories, on the other hand, are those areas which
arc under the direct contro l and admin istration of the Centr al gover nmen t. Hence, they
arc also know n as 'centr ally admin istere d
territo ries'. 'In this way, existe nce of these territorie s consti tutes a consp icuou s depar ture
from federa lism in India; the Gover nmen t
of India is plainl y unitar y in so far as the
relati onshi p betwe en New Delhi and these
Centr al enclav es is conce rned,1 .

t

CREATION OF UNIO N
TERRITORIES

Durin g the British Rule, certai n areas were
consti tuted as 'sched uled distric ts' in 1874.
Later, they came to be know n as 'chief commissio ners provin ces'. After indep enden ce,
they were placed in the catego ry of Part 'C'
1s.R. Mahes hwari, State Govern ments in India ,

Ma cmilla n, 2000 Editio n , p . 131.

Union Territories

States and Part 'D' Thrrit ories2. In 1956, they
were consti tuted as the 'union territo ries' by
the 7th Const itution al Amen dmen t Act (1956)
and the States Reorg anisa tion Act (1956 ).
Gradu ally, some of these union territo ries
have been elevat ed to stateh ood. Thus, Himachal Prade sh, Manip ur, Tripu ra, Mizor am,
Aruna chal Prade sh and Goa, which are states
today were forme rly union territo ries. On the
other hand, the territo ries that were acquir ed
from the Portuguese (Goa, Dama n and Diu,
and Dadra and Nagar Havel i) and the Frenc h
(Pudu cherry ) were consti tuted as the union
territo ries.
At presen t, there are eight Union Territories.
They are (along with the year of creati on):
(1) Anda man and Nicob ar Island s-195 6,
(2) Delh i- 1956, (3) Laksh adwe ep-19 56,
(4) Puduc herry- 1962, (5) Chand igarh- 1966,
(6) Jamm u and Kashm ir-20! 9, (7) Ladakh- 2019
and (8) Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Dama n
and Diu- 2020. Till 1973, Laksh adwee p was
known by the name of Lacca dive, Minic oy
and Amin divi Island s. In 1992, Delhi was
redesi gnated as the Nation al capita l Territ ory
of Delhi. Till 2006, Puduc herry was known as
Pondi cherry.
1950, the constit ution contai ned a four-fold
classif ication of the states and territo ries of the
Indian Union - Part A, Part B and Part C states and
Part 0 territo ries.

2 rn

410

Jf7 Indian Polity

The uni on territories have been created
for a variety of reason s. These are mentioned

below',

1. Political and administrative consider-

ation-Delhi and Cha ndi garh.

z. Cultural distinctiveness-Puducherry and

Dadra a nd Nagar Haveli and Daman and
Di u.
3. Strategic importance-Andaman a nd
Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep.
4. Special treatment and ca re of the ba ckward and tribal p eo pl e-M izoram,
Manipuf, T'ripura and Arunachal Pradesh
which later beca me states.
In 2019, the e rstwhil e state of J;:lIl1111U and
Kashmir was bifurcated into two separate
union territories, namely, the Union territory
of Jammu and Kashmir, and th e Union terr itory of Ladakh. Whi le introducing the Jammu
and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill, 20 19, in the
Parliament, the central government gave the
following reasons for the creation of these h\'o
new union territories:
1. The Ladakh division of th e state of
Jammu and Kashmir has a large area
but is spa rse ly pop ulated with a very
difficult terrain. There has been a long
pending demand of people of Ladakh, to
give it the status of a Union te rri tory to
enabl e them to realize their aspirations.
The Un ion territory of Ladakh will be
without a legislatu re.
2. Further, keeping in view the prevailing
internal security s ituation, fuelled by
cross border terrorism in the ex isting
state of Jammu and Kashmir, a separate
Union territory for Jammu and Kashmir
is being created. The Uni on territo ry
of Jammu and Kashmir will be with a
legislature.
In 2020, the erstwhile two separate un ion
territory of Dadra and Naga r Havel i (origi nalJy
created in 1961) and union territory of Daman
and Diu (o riginall y created in 1962) were
merged into a new union territory of Dadra
lJ. C. Jo hari : I ndia n Goucrllm ellt lIlUl Politics, Vish .. l,
volume II , 13lh Edilion, 2001, p. 499.

and Naga r Haveli and Daman and Diula . Whi le
introducing: the Dadra and Nagar Havel i and
Daman and Diu (Merger of Union Territories)
Bill, 2019, in the Parliament, the central government gave the following reasons for the merger
of these hvo sepa rate union territories into a
single union territory:
1. The Union territories of Dadra and Nagar
Have li a nd Daman and Diu share a
lot in terms of adm inistrative se t up,
hi story, language and culture. The
Secretaries to vario us Departments,
Chief of Po li ce and Chief Co nserva tor of
Forest of the both Union territories are
co mlll on and the officers of All-In di a
Services posted by the Ministries of
Home Affairs, Environm ent and Forests
serve both these territories as pe r the ir
work allocation. Further, the po li cies
and development schemes in various
sec tors including Touris m , Industries,
Education, Information Thchnology are
simila r.
2 . Besid es these, there are two secretariats
and parali el departments whi ch co nsume infrastructure and manpower in
each Unio n territory. The Ad ministrator,
Secretaries, and Heads of certain departments functio n s in both the Uni o n
te rritor ies on alternate days affecti ng
their availab ili ty to people and monitoring function ing of subordi nate staff.
The subordinate emp loyees of both the
Union territories are separate. Further,
va ri ous departments of the Government
of India have to co-ordinate with both
the Union territories separately, caus ing
duplicat ion of works.
3 . Hav ing two separate co nst itutio nal a nd
administrative entities in both the Union
territories leads to lot of duplicacy, inefficien cy and wastefu l expenditure. Further,
this also ca uses unnecessary financia l
burden o n the Gove rnm e nt. Bes id es
J;a Vide lhe Dadm a nd Naga r Haveli and Daman and
Diu (Merger of Union 'Territories) Act, 20 19 with
effect fro m 26th January, 2020.

Union Territories

these, there are various challenges for
cadre managemen t and ca reer progres.s ian of employees.
4. In viewofthe policy of the Govern ment to
have "Minimum Governm e nt, Maximum
Govern.an cc", considering small population and limited geogra phical area of
both th e Union territories and to use
the services of officers efficientl y, it
has been deci ded to merge the Union
territories of Dadra a nd Naga r Haveli
and Daman and Diu into a singl e Union
territory.

ADMINISTRATION OF UNION
TERRITORIES

j

.

v

Artic1es 239 to 241 in Part VIII of the Co nstitution deal with the union territories. Even
though all the union territories belong to
one category, there is no uniformity in their
administrative system.
Every union territory is administe red by
the Pres id ~nt acting through an administrator
a ppointed by him /h~r. An administrator of a
union territory is an agent of the President
and not h!.':ad of state li~ e a ~overnor, The
President ca n specify the design ation of an
administrator; it may be Lif!utenant Governor
or Ohi ef Commissioner or Administrator, At
present, it IS Lieutenant Governor in the case
of Delhi, Puducherry, Andaman a n~ Nicoba r
Islands, Jammu and Kashmir a nd Ladakh and
Administrator in the case of Chandigarh , Dadra
and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu and
Lakshadweep. The President ca n also appoint
the governor of a state as the admini strator of
fin adjoining union territory. In that capacity,
the governor isto act inpependently of his/her
council of ministers.
The U11-ion 'Territories of Puducherry (in
1963), Delhi (in 1992) a nd Jammu and Kashmir (i n 201 9) are provided with a legislative
assembly4 and a coun cil of ministers h ea ded
"The Assembly ofPuducherry copsists 0(30 mem~rs
while that .of Delhi 70 me mbers and th!Jt of Jammu
and Kashmir 83 members.

~

A

411

by a chief minister. The remaining six union
territories do not have such popular political
institutions, But, the establishment of such
institutions in the union territories does n ot
diminish the supreme con trol of the President
and Parliament over them,
The Pa rli ame nt ca n ma ke laws on any
subj ect of the three Hsts ( in cl uding the State
List) fo r th e union territories. This power
of Parliament also ex tends to Pudu ch erry,
Delhi and Jammu and Kashmir, whi ch h ave
their own loca l legis latures. This mean s
that, the legisla tive power of Parliam ent for
the union territories o n subjects of the State
List remain unaffected even after establishing a loca l legislature for them. But, the
legislative asse mbl y of Pudu cherry ca n also
make laws on an y s\lbject of th e State List
a nd the Con current List. Similarly, th e legisla t ive assembly of Delhi can make laws on
any subject of the State Li st (except publi c
order, poli ce an d lan d) a nd the Concurren t
List. Likewise, the leg islative asse mbl y of
Jammu and Kashmir ca n make laws on any
subj e(:t of the State List (except publi c order
and policf!) and the Concurrent List,
The President can make regulations for the
peace, progress and good government of th e
Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep,
Dadra and Nagflr Haveli an d Daman and
Diu and Ladakh. In the case of Puducherry
also, the Prf!s ident ca n legislate by making
regul atio ns but only when the assembly is
suspended or dis~olved . A regulation made by
the President has the sam e force and effect
a~ an act of Parlia ment and ca n also repeal
or a m en ~ a ny act of Parliament in relation
to these union territories.
The Parliament can establish a high court
for a union territory or put it under the
jurisd iction of the high court of adjacent
state. Delhi is the only union territory that
has a high court of its own (since 1966).
Th e Bombay High Court has got jurisdiction
over the union territory of Dadra and Nagar
Haveli a nd Daman a nd Diu, Andam an a nd
Nicobar Islands',1 CJ:tandigarh, Lak s h ~dwee p
and Puducherry are placed under the Calcutta,

Punjab and Haryana, Kerala, and Madra s High
Courts respectively. The Jammu and Ka shmi r
& Ladakh Hi gh Co urt is th e co mm on hi gh
court for the two union territories of Jammu
and Kashmir, a nd Ladakh .
The ad mini strative syste m (exec uti ve,
leg islature a n d judiciary) of un io n territo ries is summarised in Thb le 4 1.] . Si mil a rl y,
a com pariso n of states and uni on terr itor ies
is a lso given in Ta bl e 41.2 .
T he Co n stituti on does not contain any
separate provision s for the administration of
acquired te rritories. But, the const itutional
provisions for the admini stration of union territories also ap ply to the a cquired territori es.

t SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR DELHI
The 69th Co nstitu tiona l Amendment Act of
199]5 prov id ed a specia l SL:1tus to the Unio n
Territory of De lh i, an d redesignated it th e
Na tional Ca pital Th rritory of Delhi a nd designated the admini strator of Delhi as t he li e utenant (It.) gove rnor. It created a legislative
assembly and a coun ci l of mini sters for Delhi.
The strength of t he asse mbl y is fixed at
70 membe rs, di rectly e lec ted by the peop le.
Th e e lectio ns a re co nducted by t he e lectio n
co mmi ss ion of India. T he asse mbly can make
laws on a ll the matters of the St:.c.1te Li st a nd
th e Co ncurre n t List excep t the three matters
of the Stale List, that is, public order, po li ce
a nd land. But, th e laws of Parliament prevail
over those made by th e Asse mbl y.
Th e st rength of the co unci l of mini sters
is fixed ilt te n per ce nt of the total stre ngth
of the asse mbl y, that is, seven-o n e c hi ef
min ister a nd six oth e r mini sters. The chi ef
mi nister is a ppo inted by the President (not
by t he It. gover nor). T he other min iste rs are
a ppoin ted by the Presiden t on th e advice o f
the c h ief mini ster. The mini sters hold office
d uring the pl eas ure of th e Pres ident. The
coun ci l of mini sters is collectively respo nsible to th e assembl y.
5Wilh e ffect from I February 1992.

The coun ci l of 1l11 ntste rs headed by the
chief minister a id .lI1d advise the It. governor
in the exe rcise of hi s/ he r fun ctio ns exce pt ill
so fa r as he/ she is required to act in h is/ her
di scretion. In the case of difference of opinion
between the It. governo r a nd hi s/ her ministers, the It. gove rno r is to re fe r the matter to
the Preside nt for decis ion and act accordj ngly.
When a s ituation arises in whi c h th e
a dmini strat ion of the te rrito ry ca nnot be
ca rried on in accordan ce with th e above
provis ions, the President ca n suspe nd th eir
(above provisions) o peratio n and make the
necessary in cidenta l or co nseq ue ntial provisions for adm inistering the territory. In bri ef,
in case of failure of constitutiona l mach inery,
t he President ca n im pose hi s/ he r rule in the
territory. T hi s can be do ne on the report of
the It. gove rn or or otherwise. This p rov isio n
rese mbl es Art icle 356 whic h deals with the
impositio n of Pres id e nt 's Rul e in the states.
The It. governor is e mpowered to pro mulgate ordinan ces during recess of th e a sse mb ly. An ordi n a n ce has the sa me force as an
act of the asse mbl y. Every suc h ord in a nce
mu st be a pproved by the assembly within
s ix weeks from its reasse mbl y. He ca n also
withdraw an ordi na n ce at a ny time. But, he
ca nnot promul gate an ordina nce when the
asse mbl y is di sso lved or suspen ded. Furthe r,
no suc h ordinance ca n be promulgated or
withdrawn witho ut the prio r perm ission of
th e Pres id e nt.

ADVISORY COMMITTEES
OF UNION TERRITORIES
Under the Governme n t of Inelia (Allocation of
Busin ess) Rules 1961 , Ministry of 1·lome Affairs
is the nodal ministry fo r a ll matters of Uni on
Territo ri es re lat in g to legislation, finance
and budget, se rvices and a ppo intm e n t of
Lt. Governors a nd Ad ministra tors.
All th e five un w-ithout leg islature (A ndaman and Nicobar Islands, Chandiga rh , Dadra
and Nagar Have l i and Daman and Diu,
Lakshadweep and La dakh ) ha ve th e forum

Union Territories

of Home Minister's Advisory Committee
(HMAC)/ Administrator's Advisory Committee (AAC). 'While HMAC is chaired by the
Union Home Minister, AAC is chaired by
the Administrator of the concerned un. -The
Members of Parliament and elected members

~, 413

from the local bodies (District Panchayats
and Municipal Councils) of the respective
. un are members of these committees among
others. These Committees discusses the general issues relating to social and economic
development of the UTs. 6

Table 41.1 Administrative System of Union Territories at a Glance

1.

UnIOn Territories

Executive

Andaman and Nicobar Islands

Lt. Governor

Legis lature

...-

•

2.

Chandigarh

Administrator

3.

Dadra and Nagar Haveli and
Daman and Diu

--- --_.__ ...•.-

4.

5.

-- ----Oelhi

Lakshadweep
-.,..---,,-.,, ~ - ~

6.

Pudueherry

7.

Jammu and Kashmir

)

JudlclJry

Under Calcutta High Court

---~

... - ----. --

Administrator

. . .--------_._.

(e) U. Governor
(b) Chief minister
(e) Council of ministers

l egislative Assembly

Separate High Court

Under Kerala High Court

Administrator

, 1m

~;r- -

(allt. Governor
(b) Chief minister
(e) Council of ministers

legislative Assembly

Under Madras High Court

(a) Lt. Governor

l egislative Assembly

Under Jammu and Kashmir &
Ladakh High Court

(c) Council of Ministers

8.

' ___

~

It. Governor

l adakh

1

Under Bombay High Court

(b) Chief Minister
- ~ --

~

Under Punjab and Haryana
High Court

~

7'~

Under Jammu and Kashmir &
l adakh High Court

Note, The Governor of Punjab is concurrently the Administrator of Chandlgarh 7•

Table 41.2

Comparing States and Union Territories
Union Territories

States

2.

J.

They have autonomy.

1.

Their relationship with Centre Is unitary.

2.

They are under the direct control and administration of
the Centre.

3.

They do not have any autonomy.

~,~--~--- - - -- -

4.

there Is uniformity In their administrative set-up.

4.

There is no uniformity In their administrative set·up.

5.

Their executiVe head is known by various designatlonsadministrator or lieutenant governor or chief commissioner.
(Contd.)

6Annual Report 2021-22, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, p. 60.
1lndia 2022: A Reference Annual, Publications Division, Govern ment of India, p. 71.

~

414

7.

(J Indian Polity

Parliament cannot make laws on the subjects
of the slate list in relation to the states except
under extraordinary circumstances.

7.

Parliament can make laws on any subject of the three
lists In relation to the union territories.

Table 41.3

Articles Related to Union Territories at a Glance

A rtICle N o

Subject matter

239.

Administration of Union territories

239AA.

Special provisions with respect to Delhi

..._

-.,.....--moch"-

of ex>nSIIIutIonaI

2398.

Power of administrator to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Legislature

24 1.

High Courts for Union territories

CHAPTE

m42

rticle 244, in Part X of the Con stitu~
tion , envisages a specia l system of
I
administration for certain areas designated as 'scheduled areas' and 'tribal a reas',
The Fifth Sch edule of the Constitution deals
with the administration and control of scheduled areas a nd scheduled tribes in any state
except the four states of Assam, Meghalaya,
Tripura and Mizoram 1 • The Sixth Sch edule
of the Constitution, on the other hand, deals
with the administration ofth e tribal a reas in

}A

the four northeastern states of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.

ADMINISTRATION OF
SCHEDULED AREAS
'The scheduled areas are treated differently
from the other areas in the country b eca use
the~ a re inhabi ted by 'aboriginals' who
are socially and economically rath er backward, and special efforts n eed to be made
to improve their condition. Therefore, the
whole of the normal administrative machinery operating in a sta te is not extended to
the scheduled areas and the Ce ntral government has somewhat greater responsibility
for these areas,2.
I At present, te n states of India have scheduled areas.

These are: Andhra Pradesh, Thlangana, Jharkhand,
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha and Rajasthan.
2M.P. Jain, Indian Constitutional Law, Wadhwa,
Fourth Edition, 1987, p. 236.

Scheduled and
Tribal Areas

The various features of administration co ntained in the Fifth Schedule are as follows:
1. Declaration of Scheduled Areas: T he
President is empowered to declare an
area to be a scheduled area. He/ she can
also increase or decrease its area, alter
its boundary lines, rescind such designation or make fresh orders for such redesignation on an area in consultation with
the governor of the state concerned.
The criteria for declaring any area as
a scheduled area is as follows 2a :
(i) Preponderance of tribal population;
(ii) Compactness and reasonable size of
the area;
(iii) A viable administrative entity such
as a District, Block or Thluk; and
(iv) Economic backwardness of the area
as compared to the neighbouring
areas.
The above criteria for declaration of
scheduled areas is as such not spelt out
in the constitution, but has become wellestablished.
2. Executive Power of State and Centre: The
executive power of a state extends to
the scheduled areas therein. But the
governor has a special responsibility
regarding such a r eas. He /she ha s
to submit a report to the President
regarding the administration of such
areas, annually or whenever so required
la Annual Report 2021-22, Ministry of Tribal Affairs,

Government of India, p. 51.

416

Jf1' Indian Polity

by th e President. The execut ive power of

the Centre extends to giving directions to
the states regard ing the administration

of such a rea s.
3. Tribes Advisory Council: Each state having scheduled areas has to establish a
tribes advisory cou ncil to advise o n welfare a n d adva nce ment of the schedu led
tribes. It is to co nsi st of 20 members,
th ree-fo urth s of who m are to be th e

representatives of the sch edu led tribes
in th e state leg islative assembly. A similar cou ncil can also be established in
a state havin g sch ed uled tribes bu t not
scheduled areas therei n , if the President
so di rects.
4. Law applicable to Scheduled Areas: The
governor is empowered to direct that
any parti cular act of Parliam e nt or
the state legislature does n ot apply to
a schedul ed area or apply with specified modifications a nd exceptions. He/
she ca n a lso make regulations for the
peace and good govern ment of a sc hedul ed area after co n sultin g the tribes
adv isory co un cil. Such regulations may
prohibit or restrict the tra nsfer of land
by or among members of the sc heduled
tribes, regulate the allotment of Jand to
m emb ers of the sch edul ed tribes and
regulate the busi ness of m oney-lend ing
in relation to the sched ul ed tribes. Also,
a regul atio n may re pea l or a mend any
act of Parliament or the state legislature,
which is a ppHca ble to a sc heduled area.
But, a ll such regula tions require the
assent of the Pres ident.
T he Co n st itution requires the Presiden t
to a ppoint a co mmi ss ion to report on the
admini strati on of the schedul ed areas and th e
welfare of the schedu led tribes in the states.
He/ she ca n appoint such a co mmi ssion at
any time bu t co mpu lso ril y after ten yea rs
of the com mencement of the Co nstitu tion.
Hen ce, a comm issio n was a ppointed in 1960.
It was headed by U.N. Dhebar an d sub mitted its report in 1961. After four deca des,
the secon d comm issio n was appointed in

2002, under the chairmanship of Dilip Singh
Bhuria. It submitted its report in 2004.

l

ADMINISTRATION OF TRIBAL
AREAS

The Constitution, under Six th Sch ed ule, CO Iltains spec ial provisions for the administration of tribal areas in the four north-easte rn
states of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and
Mizoram. The rationality behind the specia l
arrangements in resp ect of o nly these four
states li es in the following:
The tribes in Assa m , Meghalaya, 'T'ripura
a nd Mizoram have n ot assimil ated much
the life and ways of the oth er peo pl e in
these states. These areas have hitherto
been anthropological spec im en s. Th e
tribal peop le in other parts of India have
more or less adopted the culture of the
majority of the people in whose midst
they li ve. Th e tribes in Assam, Meghalaya, i'ripura a nd Mizoram, on the other
hand, still ha ve their roots in their own
culture, customs an d civili zation. These
areas are, therefore, treated differently
by the Co nstituti on and sizeable amou nt
of auto no my has been give'n to these
peop le for se lf-government.3
At present, there are ten tribal areas in the
four north-eastern states of Assam, Meghalaya, 'Ihpura and Mizoram. These are mention ed in Thb le 42.1.
The various features of administration conta in ed in the Sixth Schedule a re as follows:
1. The tribal a reas in th e four states of
Assam, MeghaJaya, 'T'ripura and Mizoram
have been co nst ituted as auto nomous
districts. But, they do not fall outside the
executive authority of the state concerned.
2. The gove rnor is empowered to organise
and re-organise th e autonomous districts.
Thus, he/ sh e ca n increase or decrease
their areas o r change their nam es or
define their boundaries and so on.
3 Same as footnote 2 above. p. 237.

Scheduled and Tribal Areas

3. Ifthere are different tribes in'an aut9nomous district, the governor can divide
the district into several autonomous ·
regions.
4. Each autonomous district has a district
council consisting of 30 members, of
whom four are nominated by the governor and the remaining 26 are elected on
the basis of adult franchise. The elected
members hold office for a term of five
years (unless the ~ouncil is d!ssolved
earlier) and nominated members hold
office during the pleasure of the governor. Each 'autonomous region also has a
separate regional council.
5. The distt:ict and regional councils admin:
ister the areas under their jurisdiction.
They can make laws ~n c~~in specified
matters like land, forests, canal water,
shifting cultivation, village administration, inheritance of property, marriage
and divorce, social customs and so on.
But all such laws require the assent of
the governor.
6. The district and regional councils 'w ithin
their territorial jurisdictions can constitute village councils or courts for trial of
suits and cases between the tribes. They
hear appeals from them. The jurisdiction
of high court over these suits and cases
is specified by the governor.

Table 42.1

,.
2.

7. The district council can establish, construci- or manage primary .schools,
dispensaries, markets, ferries, fisheries,
roads and so, on in the district. It can
also make regulations for the control
of money lending and trading by nontiibals. But, 's uch regulations require the
assent 'o f the governor.
8. The district and regional councils are
empowered to assess and collect land rev~nue and to impos_e certain specified taxes.
9. The acts of Parliament or the state legislature do not apply to autonomous
districts and autonomous regions or
apply with specified modifications and,
exceptions4 •
10. The governor can appoint a commission
to exami1)e and report on any platter
relating to the administration of the
autonomous districts or regions. He!
she may dissolve a district or regional
council on the recommendation of the
commission.
4The power of direction, in this regard, lies either
with the President or the Governor. Thus, in the
case of Assam, it lies with the Governor, both in
respect of acts of Parliament or state legislature. In
the case ofMeghalaya, Tripura and Miwram, it lies
with the President in respect of acts of Parliament
and governor in respect of acts of state legislature.

Tribal Areas at a Glance
States
Assam

Tribal Areas
1.

2.
3.
Meghalaya

,.

2.

3.

3.

Tripura

4.

Mizoram

North Cachar Hills District.
Karbi Anglong District.
Bodoland Territorial Areas District.
Khasi Hills District.
Jaintia Hills District.
Garo Hills District.
Tripura Tribal Areas District.

1.

2.
3.

~ 417

Chakma District.
Mara District.
Lai District.

418

P

Indian Polity

Table 42.2

Articles Related to Scheduled and Tribal Areas at a Glance

Article No

Subject-matter

Control of the Union over the admInistration of Scheduled Areas and the welfare of Scheduled Tribes

Scan the QR Code to access the con ceptual video on Scheduled and
'fribal Areas (Demonstration and discussion through Indian Map)
and other important to pics on EDGE

. ..

In this Part...
43. Election Commission
44. Union Public Service Commission
45. State Public Service Commission
46. Finance Commission
47. Goods and Services Tax Council
48. Notional Commission for SCs
49. National Commission for STs

,

CHAPTER

"

50. Notional Commission for BCs
51. Special Officer for linguistic Minorities
52. Comptroller and Auditor General of India
53. Attorney General of India
54. Advocate General of the State
55. Constitutional Prescriptions

Election Commission

he Election Commission is a permanent and an independent body estabHshed by the Constitution of India
directly to ensure free and fair elections in
the country. Article 324 of the Constitution
provides that the power of superintendence,
direction and control of elections to parliament, state legislatures, the office of President
of India and the office of Vice-President of
India ~han be vested in the election commission. Thus, the Election Commission is an
All-India body in the sense that it is common
to both the Central government and the state
governments.
[t must be noted here that the election commission is not concerned with the elections to
panchayats and municipalities in the states.
For this, the Constitution of India provides for
a separate State Election Commission l .

T

l COMPOSITION
Article 324 of the Constitution has made the
following provisions with regard to the composition of election commission:
IVide 13rd and 74th Constitutional Amendment
Acts of 1992.

1. The Election Commission shall consist

of the chief election commissioner and
such number of other election commissioners, if any, as the President may
from time to time fix.
2. The appointment of the chief election
commissioner and other election commissioners shall be made by the President.
3. When any other election commissioner
is so appointed, the chief election commissioner shall act as the chairman of
the election commission.
4 . The President may also appoint after
consultation with the election commission such regional commissioners as hel
she may consider necessary to assist the
election commission.
5. Subject to the provisions of any law made
by the Parliament, the conditions of service and tenure of office of the election
commissioners and the regional commissioners shall be determined by the
President.
Since its inception in 1950 and till
15 October 1989, the election commission
functioned as a single member body consisting of the Chief Election Commissioner. On

I

420

,(J Indion Polity

16 October 1989, the President appointed
two more election commissioners to cope
with the increased work of the election
commission on account of lowering of the
voting age from 21 to 18 years.2 Thereafter,
the Election Commission functioned as a
multimember body consisting of three eJection commissioners. However, the two posts
of election commissioners were abolished in
January 1990 and the Election Commission
was reverted to the earlier position. Again in
October 1993, the President appointed two
more election commissioners. Since then
and till today, the Election Commission has
been functioning as a multi-member body
consisting of three election commissioners.
The Election Commission (Conditions
of Service of Election Commissioners and
'Transaction of Business) Act, 1991 contains
the following provisions:
1. The chief election commissioner and the
two other election commissioners shall
have equa l powers and receive equa l salary, allowances and other perquisites,
which are similar to those of a judge of
the Supreme Court. 3
2 . In case of difference of opinion amongst
the Chief Election Commissioner and/ or
two other election commissioners, the
matter is decided by the Commission by
majority.
3. They hold office for a tenn of six years
or until they attain the age of 65 years,
whichever is earlier. They can also resign
at any time by writing to the President.

2By the 61st Constitutional Amendment Act of 1988,
which came into force in 1989.

He/ she cannot be removed from his/
her office except in same manner and
on the same grounds as a judge of the
Supreme Court. In other words, he/she
can be removed by the President on the
basis of a resolution passed to that effect
by both the Houses of Parliament with
special majority, either on the ground
of proved misbehaviour or incapacity.
Thus, he/ she does not hold his / her
office till the pleasure of the President,
though they are appointed by him / her.
2. The service conditions of the chief election commissioner cannot be varied
to his/ her disadvantage after his/ her
appointment.
3. Any other election commissioner or a
regional commissioner cannot be removed
from office except on the recommendation of the chief election commissioner.
This means that the protection (security
of tenure) available to the Chief Election
Commissioner is not available to the other
election commissioners.
Though the constitution has sought to
safeguard and ensure the independence and
impartiality of the Election Commission,
some flaws can be noted, viz.,
1. The Constitution has not prescribed
the qualifications (legal, educational,
administrative or judicial) of the members of the Election Commission.
2. The Constitution has not specified the
term of the members of the Election
Commission.
3. The Constitution has not debarred the
retiring election commissioners from any
further appointment by the government.
In Anoop Baranwal case 3a (2023), the
Supreme Court gave the following directions
to ensure the independence and neutrality
of the Election Commission, free from all
external political and executive interference:
1. It declared that the appointment of the
Chief Election Commissioner and the
other Election Commissioners shall be

had been fixed at ~2.50 lakh per month.

3aAnoop Baranwal vs. Union of India (2023).

t INDEPENDENCE

Article 324 of the Constitution has made the
following provisions to safeguard and ensure
the independent and impartial functioning
of the Election Commission:
1. The chief election commissioner is
provided with the security of tenure.

3 In 2018, the salary of a judge of the Supreme Court

flection Commission

mad e o n the recommen datio n s of a
three·member committee con sisti ng of
the followin g:
(a) The Prime Mini ster,
(b) The Lea der of th e Opposition in
the Lok Sabha (i n case there is no
Leader of the Opposition in th e Lok
Sabha, then the Lea der of the larg·
est oppos ition party in term s of the
num erical strength) , and
(e) The Chief Justice of India.
2. It is desirable that the grounds of removal
of the other Election Co mmiss io n ers
sh all be th e sa m e as that of the Chi ef
Election Co mmi ss ion er i.e., on the
like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme
Co urt subj ect to the recommendation
o f the Chi ef Election Com mi ss ion er
as provided under Article 324 of the
Co n stitution.
3. The conditions of service of the other
Election Commissioners shall not be va ried
to their disadva ntage after a ppointment.
According to the Supreme Court, the above
direction s shall be in effect, until th e Parlia·
ment makes a law in con sona nce with Articl e
324 of the co nst itutio n.

t POWERS AND FUNCTIONS

The powers and fun ctions of the Elect ion
Co mmi ssion with regard to election s to the
Parliam ent , sta te legislatures and offices of
President and Vi ce·President ca n be classified
into three categories, viz,
1. Administrative
2. Advisory
3. Quasi..Judicial
In detail, th ese powers and functions are:
1. Th determine the territorial a reas of th e
electora l co n stituen cies throughout the
country on the basis of the Delimitation
Co mmi ssion Act of Parliament. 4
2. To pre pare an d p e riodi ca ll y rev ise
electoral rolls a nd to reg ister all eligible
voters.
"The Parliament has made the Delimita tion
Commission Acts in 1952, 196:l, 1972 and 2002.

~ 421

3. 1b notify the dates a nd sch edul es of
election s a nd· to sc rutini se nomination
papers.
4. 1b grant recognition to politica l parties
and allot election sy mbols to th em .
5. 1b act as a court for settling disputes
related to granting of recogniti on to
political parties and allotment of election
symbols to them.
6. 1b appoint officers fo r enquiring into
disputes relating to electoral arrangements.
7. 1b determine the code of conduct to
be obse rved by th e parties and the
ca ndidates at the time of elections.
8. 'Tb prepare a roster for publici ty of the
policies of the political parties on radio
and TV in times of elections.
9. 1b advise the President on matters relating
to the disqualifications of the m embers of
Parliament.
10. 1b advise the governor on matters relating
to the disqualificatio n s of the m e mbers
of state legislature.
11. 1b cancel polls in the eve nt of rigging,
booth ca pturing, v iolence and other
irregularities.
12. 1b request th e President or the governor
for requi sitioning the staff n ecessa ry for
conduct ing elections.
13. 1b supervise the machin ery of elections
throughout the country to ensure free
and fair elections.
14. 1b advise the President whether elections
can be held in a state under preS ident's
rul e in order to exte nd the period of
emergen cy after one year.
15. 1b register politica l parties for the purpose of elections and grant them the
status of na tional or state parties on the
basis of their poll performance.
Th e Election Commi ss io n is assisted by
deputy election commiss ioners. They are
drawn from the civil serv ice and appo inted
by the com mission with te nure system . They
a re ass isted , in turn, by the secretar ies, joint
sec retarie s, de puty sec retaries and under
sec retaries posted in the secretariat of the
comm issio n .

422 (! Indian Polity
At the state level, the E I ~ction Co mmission
is assisted by the chief e lectoral officer, who is
appo inted by the ch ief election co mmissioner
in consu ltation with the state govern ment.
Below this, at the district level, the coll ector
acts as the district returning officer. Hel she
a ppoints a returning office r for every constituen cy in the di str ict a nd presid ing office r
for every polling booth in the constituency.

j

VISION, MISSION
AND PRINCIPLES

The vision, mi ss ion and guiding prin ciples
of th e Election Co mmission are as follows 5 :

Vision The Electio n Co mmi ss ion of Ind ia
strives to be an Inst itution of Excel1ence by
enha n c ing active e ngagement, participation;
and deepening and st re ngthening electora l
democra cy in Ind ia and globa ll y.
Mission The Election Co mmission of In dia
maintains independence, integrity and autonomy; ensures access ibi li ty, inclusiveness, and
ethica l participation of stake holders; and,
adopts highest standards of professiona l ism
for de li vering free, fair, and transparent
elections to strengthen the trust in e lectora l
de moc racy an d gove rn ance.
Guiding Principles The Commissio n has la id
down for itself gu id ing principl es of good
governance:
1. To u p h o ld the val ues enshr in ed in
the Const ituti on viz, equa li ty, equ ity,
SStrategic Plan 2016-2025, Election Comm ission of
India, pp. 8-9.

impartia l ity, independence; and ru le of
law in supe rintendence, direction and
co ntrol over the electora l governance;
2 . 1b co nduct elections with highest sta ndard of c redibility, freeness, fa irn ess,
transparency, integrity, accountability,
auto nomy and professionalism ;
3. 1b ensure partici pation of a ll eligible c itizens in the electora l process in an inc lusive voter cent ri c and vote r-fri e ndly
e nvironm e nt;
4 . 1b engage with political parties and a ll
stake holders in t he interest of electoral
process;
5 . 1b promote awa reness about the e lectoral process a nd electora l governance
amongst sta keholders namel y, voters,
political parties, e lect ion functionaries, ca ndidates and peop le at large; and
to enhance and strengthen confidence
a nd trust in the electora l system of t his
country;
6. 1b develop the human resource fo r effective and professio nal delivery of eloctoral serv ices;
7. 1b build quali ty infrastructure for smooth
con du ct of e lectora l process;
8. 1b adopt technology for improvement in
all areas of e lecto ra l process;
9 . 1b strive for adoption of innovative pract ices for achieving excell ence and overa ll rea lization of the vision and mission;
10. 10 contribute towards t he reinforce me nt
of de m ocratic va lu es by ma inta in i ng
and re in forcing co n fidence and trusr of
the people in the e lectora l system of the
country.

,

CHAPTER;

44

Union Public Service
Commission

he Union Public Service Commission CUPSe) is the central recruiting
agency in India. It is an independent
constitutional body in the sense that it has
been directly created by the Constitution.
Articles 315 to 323 in Part XIV of the Constitution contain elaborate prov,i sions regarding
the composition, appointment and removal of

T

members along with the independence, power
and functions of the UPSC.

t COMPOSITION
The UPSC consists of a chairman and other
members appointed by the President of
India. The Constitution, without specifying
the strength of the Commission has left the
matter to the discretion of the President,
who determines its composition. Further, no
qualifications are prescribed for the Commission'S membership except that one·half
of the members of the Commission should
be such persons who have held office for at
least ten years either under the Government
of India or under the government of a state.
The Constitution also authorises the Presi·
dent to determine the conditions of service
of the chairman and other members of the
Commission. In addition, the President is
authorised to make provisions with respect
to the number of members of the staff of the
Commission and their conditions of service.
The chairman and members of the Commission hold office for a term of six years or
until they attain the age of 65 years, which·
ever is earlier. However, they can relinquish
their offices at any time by addressing their

resignation to the president. They can also
be removed before the expiry of their term
by the President in the manner as provided
in the Constitution.
The President can appoint one of the mem·
bers of the UPSC as an acting chairman in the
following two circumstances l :
(a) When the office of the chairman falls
vacant; or
(b) When the chairman"is unable to perform
his/her functions due to absence or
some other reason.
The acting chairman functions till a person appointed as chairman enters on the
duties of the office or till the chairman is able
to resume his/ her duties.

t REMOVAL

The President can remove the chairman or
any other member of UPSC from the office
under the following circumstances:
(a) If he/she is adjudged an insolvent (that
is, has gone bankrupt);
(b) If he/ she engages, during hislher term of
office, in any paid employment outside
the duties of his/ her office; or
(e) If he / she is, in the opinion of the
President, unfit to continue in office by
reason of infirmity of mind or body.
In addition to these, the President can also
remove the chairman or any other member
of UPSC for misbehaviour. However, in this
case, the President has to refer the matter
to the Supreme Court for an enquiry. If the
'Added by the 15th Amendment Act of 1963.

424

f7

Indian Polity

Supreme Court, afte r the enqui ry, upholds the
ca li se of re moval and advi ses so, the Presid e n t can re move the chairman or a m e mbe r.
Un der the provisions of the Co nstituti on , the
adv ise tend ered by t he Supre me Court in thi s
rega rd is binding on the Pres id e n t. During
the course of e nqui ry by the Supreme Court,
the President can suspend the chai rman or the
member of UPSC.
Defi nin g the term 'm isbehaviour' in this
co ntext , th e Const itution states th a t t h e
chairman or any other m em ber of the u pse is
deemed to be gu il ty of mi sbehaviour jf hel she
(a) is co ncerned or in terested in a ny contra ct
or agreement made by the Gove rnment of India
or the governme n t ofa state, or (b) partic ipates
in any way in ihc profit of such contract or
agreement or in a ny benefit th erefro m otherwise than as a member a nd in com mon with
other mem bers of an inco rporated co mpany.

t INDEPENDENCE
The Const itution ha s m<lcie the following provis ions to safeguard and e n sure the indepe ndent and imp<lrti a l fu n ctio n ing of the UPSC:
(3) The chairman or a membe r of the UPSC
can b e removed from office by t h e
President onl y in the manner and on the
grounds me n tioned in the Co nstitution .
Therefore, they e njoy security of ten ure.
(b) The condi tions of serv ice of the cha irman
or a membe r, th ough determined by the
President, ca nnot be varied to his/ he r
disadvantage afte r his/ her a ppo intme nt.
(c) T h e en tire expen ses including the
salaries, a llowances a nd pension s of
t he c ha irm a n and m embe rs and a lso
the staff of th e UPSC are cha rged on the
Conso lida ted Fund of [nd ia. Thus, t hey
are not subjec t to vote o f Parliament.
(d) The cha irm a n of the UPSC (on ceasing
to ho ld office) is not el ig ible for further
em ploy men t in the Govern ment of Ind ia
or a state:l.
2Jn 1979, the Su preme Court uph eld the va lidity of

appointment of A. I{. K.idwai , a fomwr Ch airma n
of UPSC, CIS the governor of Bihar. It ruled lhat the

(e) A m e mber of the u rsc (on ceasing to

hol d office) is eligibl e for a ppo in tme nt
as th e cha irm a n o f UPSC o r a Sta te
Public Serv ice Co mmi ss ion (S PSC) , hut
not for any other employment in the
Gove rnm e nt of Indi a or a state:!.
(I) The chairm a n or a member of ursc is
(a ft e r having co mpl e ted hi s/he r first
term) n ot eli gi b le for reappo intment to
that office (i.e. , not e ligible for sec011d
term ) .

t fUNCTIONS
The UPSC performs the following funclion s:
(i) It co ndu cts exa mina tions for appo in tments to th e a ll -Ind ia se rvi ces, Ce ntra l
serv ices an d public se rvices of the ce ntrally a dmini stered territories.
(1.i) It ass ists th e sta tes (if requested by twO
or more states to do so) in framing a nd
ope rat i ng schemes of jo int recru itme nt
for a ny serv ices for which ca nd idates
possess in g- spec ia l qualificatio ns are
required.
(iii) It serves all or a ny of the needs of a state
on the request of the state governor a nd
with the approval of the p res ide n t of
Ind ia.
(iv) It is co nsulted on the following matters
and it adv ises:
(3) On a ll matters re latin g to meth ods
of recruitm ent to c ivi l serv ices and
for c ivil posts
(b) O n the p r inciples to be followed
in making appointments to ci vil
services and posts and in maJ.."1 ng
promotion s and transfers from
on e serv ice to a n othe r and on the
sui tability of ca ndida tes for such
appointment s, promotion!) and
tra nsfers
oflice of the governor is a 'constitutional office'
and not an employme nt under the government.
·\ Vhcn a member of the UPSC is appointed as its
chairman, he/she holds the new office for six years
or until the age of superannuation , whicl"~ve r is

ea rlier.

Union Public Service Commission

1

(e) On all disciplinary matters affecting a person serving under the
Government of India in a civil capacity. This includes memorials and
petitions relating to such matters
(d) On any claim for reimburseme nt of
legal expenses incurred by a civil
se rvant in defending legal proceedings instituted against him / her in
n::spect of acts done in the exec ution of hi s/ h er official duties
(e) On any claim for the award ofa pension in respect of injuries susta ined
by a civil servant while serving
under the Government of India a nd
a ny question as to the amount of
any such award
(f) On any other matter referred to it by
the President
The Supre me Court ha s held that if the
government fails to consult the UPSC in the
matters (mentioned above), the aggrieved
publi c serva nt has no rem edy in a co urt. In
other words, the court held that any irregularity in co n sultation with the UPSC or acting without consulta tion does not invalidate
the decision of the government. Thus, the
provis ion is directory an d no t mandatory.
Similarly, the co urt h eld that a selection
by the UPSC does not co nfer any ' right to
the post upon th e ca ndidate. However, the
government is to act fairly and without
arbitrariness or mala fides.
The additional functions relating to the
se rvices of the Union ca n be conferred on
the UPSC by the Parliament. The Parliament
can also place the personnel system of any
authority, corporate body or pubJic institution within the jurisdiction of the UPSC.
Hence, the jurisdi ction of the UPSC ca n be
extended by an act made by the Parliament.
The UPSC presents, annually, to the President a report on its performan ce. The President places this report before both the Houses
of Parliament, along with a memorandum
explaining the cases where the advice of the
Commission was not accepted and the reasons
for such non-acceptance.

~ 425

t LIMITAT IONS
The following matters are kept outside the
functional jurisdiction of the UPSC. In other
words, th e upse is not co nsul ted on the following matters:
(a) Whi le making reservations of appointments or posts in favour of any ba ckward class of citizens.
(b) While taking into con s ideration the
claims of sch eduled castes and sch eduled tribes in making appointments to
senices and posts.
(e) With regard to the selection for a temporary or officiating appointment to a
post, if (a) the person appointed is no t
likel y to hold the post for a period of
more than one yea r and (b) it is n eees·
sary in the publi c interest to make the
appointment immediately and reference
to the UPSC will cause undue delay
(d) With regard to the appointments to a bulk
of Group C and Group 0 Central Services
(e) With regard to the appointments to the
posts of Chairman and members of the
boards, com mi ss ions, tribunals and
other similar authoriti es
(f) With regard to the appointments to the
posts of Heads of Diplomatic, Consular
and other similar Indian Missions in
countries abroad (eg. Ambassadors, High
Commissioners, Ministers, Commissioners,
Cons ul s - General, Representatives,
Agents)
The Pres id e nt can exclude posts, services and matters from the purview of the
UPSC. The Constitution states that the President, in respect to the all-India serv ices a nd
Ce ntral services and posts may make regulations specifying the matters in which, it shall
not be necessary to con sult the UPSC. But, all
such regulations made by the Pres ident shall
be laid before each Hou se of Parliament for
at least 14 days. The Parliament ca n amend
or repea l them.
Under the above proviSion, the President has
made regulations which are ca lled as the upse
(Exemption from Consultation) Regulations,

426

,(I Indian Polity

1958. These Regul ations have been amend ed
from time to time.

t ROLE

The Co nstitu tion visual ises the urse to be the
'watch ·dog of merit system ' in India. It is co ncerne d with the recrui tment to the All-In dia
Servic es an d Ce ntral Se rvi ces-g roup A and
group B and advise s the gover nmen t, when
co n sulted, on promo tion and discip l inary
matte rs. It is not conce rned with the classificat ion of servic es, pay and servic e co nditions, cadre manage ment, trainin g, and so on.
These matte rs are handl ed by the Depar tment
of Perso nnel and Train ing-o ne of the three
depar tment s of the Minis try of Perso nnel,
Public Griev ances and Pensio ns", There fore,
the UPSC is only a centra l recrui ting agenc y
41n 1985, a new full-nedgcd Minist ry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensio ns was created with
tJlree separa te depart ments. These are Depart mem
of Personne l and 'Training, Depart ment of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances, and Department of Pe nsions and Pensio ners' Welfare.

rable 44,1

Articles Related to the UPSC at a Glance

323

Reports of Public Service Commissions

while the Depar tment of Person nel and Thaining is the ce ntral perso nnel agenc y in Ind ia.
The ro le of the UPSC is not only li m ited,
but a lso recom me ndatio ns made by it are
on ly of adviso ry nature and hence, not binding on the gover nmen t. It is upto the Union
gover nmen t to accep t or rej ect lhat advise.
Fu rther, the gover nmen t ca ll also make rul es
which regula te the scope of the adviso ry func5
tions of the UPSC .
Also, the emerg ence of Central Vigila nce
Comm iss ion (CVe) in 1964 affect ed the role
of the upse in disc iplin ary matters. This is
becau se both are con su lted by the gover nment
while taking di sci plinary action again st a
civil servan t. The proble m arises when the
two bodi es tende r co nfli cting advise. However, the upse, being an inde pende nt constituti onal body, ha s an edge over the evc,
which is create d by an execu tive resolu tion
of the Gover nmen t of In dia and confe rred a
statut ory status in 2003.
5S uch ru les are known as the upse (Exe mption

from Consultation ) Regulations.

CHAPTER'.,

State Public Service
Commission

arallel to th~ Union Public Service
Commission (UPSC) at the Centre,
there is a State Public Service Com·
mission (SPSC) in each state. The sa me set
of Articles (i.e., 315 to 323 in Part XIV) of the
Co n stitution also deal with the co mposition ,
appointment and removal of members, power
and fun ctions and independence of a SPSC.

P

~ COMPOSITION
A State Public Service Commission con sists
of a chairman and other members appointed
by the governor of the state. The Consti tution
does not specify th e strength of the Co mmi ssion but h as left the matter to the discretion
of the Governor. Further, no qualifications
are prescribed for the commission's membership except that one-half of the m embers of
the com mission should be such persons who
have held office for at least ten yea rs either
under the government of India or under the
Government of a state. Th e Constitution also
authorises the governor to determine the
conditions of service of the chairman and
members of the Co mmi ssion. In addition, the
Governor is authorised to make provisions
with respect to the number of m embers of
the staff of the Commission and their conditions of service.
The chairman and members of the Commission hold office for a term of six years or until
they attain the age of 62 years l , whichever is
IOriginally, it was 60 years. The 41st Amendment
Act of 1976 raised it to 62 years.

earlier (in the case of UPSC, th e age limit is
65 years). However, they can relinquish their
offices at any time by addressi ng their resignation to the governor.
The governor can appoint on e of the m em bers of the SPSC as an acting chairm an in the
following two circumstances 2:
(a) When the office of the chairman falls
vacant; or
(b) When the chairman is unable to perform
hi s/ her fun ctions due to absen ce or
some other rea son.
The acting chairm an functions till th e
person a ppointed as chairm an enters on the
duties of the office or till the chairman is able
to resume hi s/ h er duties.

~ REMOVAL
Although the chairm an an d members of a
SPSC are a ppointed by the governor, they can
be removed on ly by the President (an d not
by the governor). The President ca n remove
them on the same grounds and in the sa me
manner as he / she ca n rem ove a chairman
or a m ember of the UPSC. Thus, he / she
ca n re move him / h er under the following
circum stan ces:
(a) If h e/she is adjudged an insolvent (Le.,
has gone bankrupt); or
(b) If he/ sh e engages, during his/ h er term of
office,. in any p aid employment outside
the duti es of his/ h er office; or
lAdded by the 15th Amendment Act of 1963.

428 fJ Indian Polity
(c) If he/ s h e is, in t h e opini on of the
Pres ident, unfit to contin u e in office by
reaso n o f i nfi rm ity of III i nel or bodi.
In additi on to these, the Presid e nt C'1Jl a lso
remov e th e c hairm an o r any other memb er
of the SPSC for mi sbeh av iour. Howev e r, in
this case, the Presid ent has to refer th e mat·
ter to the Supre me Co urt for an enq u iry.
If' the Supre me Court , after the enqui ry,
uphol ds t he cause of remov al and a d vises
so, the Presid e nt Cil n remov e the cha irman
o r a memb er. Under the provis ions of th e
Co n stitut ion, th e advis e tende red by the
Supre m e Court in thi s rega rd is bindi ng 011
the Presid ent. Howev e r, durin g the co urse of
enqu iry by the Supre me Court , th e gover nor
ca ll sus pend the co n cer ned c hairm an or
memb er, pe nding the fina l remov.11 o rd er of
the Pres ident o n rece ipt of the report of th e
Su prem e Co urt.
Furthe r, the Const itutio n has also de fined
the term 'misb chavi our' in thi s conte xt.
The Co nstitu tion sta tes th a t the ChilirJ11i.l1l
o r any ot her memb er of a SPSC is deem ed
to be gu ilt y of mi sbeha viour, if he / she (a)
is co n cerne d or intere sted in any co ntrac t
or agree ment l11<lde by the Gove rnmen t of
I ndia or the gover nmen t of a state, or (b)
partic ip.ate s in <I ll y way in the profit of
suc h co ntra ct o r agree ment o r in any ben·
efit t h erefro m otherw ise than as a memb er
and in com mon with other memb ers of an
in co rpora ted co mpan y,

t INDEPENDENCE

As in the ca se of UPSC, the Co n stituti on has
made thc fo ll owing provis ions to sa feguar d
and e nsure the inde pende nt and impar tial
fun ctioni ng of a SPSC:
(a ) The chai rman or a membe r ofa SPSC can
be remov ed from office by the Pres ident
J ln 1993, the Supreme Court ruled that appoin tment

of a univer sity profess or (k nown to be blind) as
a me mber of a SPSC can not be set aside o n th e
ground ofinftr mity of body or mind.

only in th e ma nner and o n the g round s
mcnti oned in the Consti tution . There fore,
(hey e njoy the sec u rity of tenure .
(b) The condi tions of servic e of th e chairm an
or a memb er, thoug h deter mined by the
gove rnor, can not be varied to hi s/ her
dismlv antagc after hi s/ her appoi ntmen t.
(c) The e nti re ex pen ses inclu din g the
sa laries, allowa nces and pensio ns of the
chairm an and me mbe rs and a lso the staff
of a SPSC are charge d on the co nsol id,Hed
fund of th e state. Thu s, t hey arc not sub·
ject to vote of t he sta te leg isla ture.
(d) The c hairm an of a spse (on ceasi ng to
hold office ) is e ligibl e for appoi ntmen t
as the c hairm a n or a m e mbe r of the
urse or as the c hairm an of any other
spse, but not for a ny other emplo ymc nt
under the Gover n m e nt of Indi a o r a

state.
(e) A m em ber ofa spse (o n ceasin g to ho ld
office ) is el ig ible for appoi ntm en t [IS
the c ha irman or a m e mbe r of the UPSC.
or as the c hairm an of that SPSC o r
a ny other srse, but not for a ny other
emp loyme nt under the Gover nmen t of
India or a state.
(f) T he c hairm an or a me mber of a srsc is
(afte r hav ing co mplet ed hi s/ her first
term) not e ligible for reapp o int me nt
to (hat office (that is, not e li g ibl e foc
secon d term ).

t FUNCTIONS

spse perfo rm s a ll those funct ions i n
respec t of the state servic es as the urse does

A

in relatio n to the Centr al servic es:
(a) It cond ucts exam inatio n s for appoi nt·
ments to the servic es of the state.
(b) It is co nsu lted on the follow ing matte rs
and it advise s:
( i) On all matte rs relat in g to metho ds
of recrui tment to c ivil servic es a nd
for civ il posts.
(ii) On the prin ci ples to be fo ll owed
in makin g appoi ntmen ts to civi')

State Public Service Commission
,
"

3..:')JV:services "and 'Postsfand m;making

'\

~ '429

Th e SPSC presents, a nnually, to th e governor a report on its p erforman ce. Th e
governor pla ces this report before both the
Houses of the state leg islature, along with a
memorandum expla ining the cases where the
advi ce of th e Commi ssion was not accepted
and thc reaso ns for such n o n-accepta nce. ~

promotions a nd:l tran s f~ r~ (ft.0m
- one service to another and on the
. suitability of ca ndidates ' for such
~ -,J
a ppoi ntm ents, promotion s a nd
tran sfers.
'
(iii) On
disciplinary matters affecting
a perso n serving under the govern~ , "
ment of the state in a civil capacity
LIMITATIONS
including memorials or petition s
relating to such matters.
The followin g matters are kept outside the
(iv) On any c1aim for reimbursement of
fun ctional jurisdiction of the SPSC. In other
'. legal expenses incurred by a civ il
words, the SPSC is not consulted on the folIo servant in defending legal proceedlowing matters:
_Ilf. ' ings instituted against hini/ her in
(a) While making reservations of appointJ .\ t'
respect of acts done in the exceuments or posts in favour of any ba ck"
'
I'
ti on 'of his/ h er official duti es.
ward class of citizen s.
(v) IOri 'anY ' cla im for the award of a
(b) While taking into Jconsideration the
pe n sion in respect of injuri es susclaims of scheduled castes and schedtained by a person whi le serving
uled tribes in making a ppointments to
un'der 'the gove rn ment of th e state
services and postS; 1f1
."',
and any question as to the amount
The governor ca n exclude posts, services
of any such award.
and matters from the ' purview of the SPSC.
~I" (vi) 'Ari y other m atter referred to it by
The Constituti o n states that the governor, in
:J
the Governor.
respect to the state sen ,ices and posts may
make regulations specifying
the matters
"1' The Supiem"c Court has held that if the
,
- , . - in
government fails to co n sult the SPSC in these
which, it shall not be necessa ry to consult the
matters, the aggrieved publi c servant has no
SPSC. But, all such regulations made by the
remedy in a court. In other words, the court
governor shall be laid before each House of
beld that any irregularity in consultation
the state legislature for at least ~ 14 ·daYs.' Th-e
With,the SPSC or acting without con sultation- state -Iegislature 'can -amend or·repeal them.
[ does not invalidate the decision of the govern-.:" :......:.-:.. ___ . '. '-- _C:f)il~J.;;..:.i'~.._~@~:':-! I
ROLE
m ent. Thus, the provision is directory and
not m andatory. Similarly, the court held that
~.
a selection by the SPSC does not confer any
The Constitution visualises the SPSC to be the
right to the post upon the candidate. However,
'watchdog of merit system' in the state. It is
the government is to act fairl y and without
concerned with the recruitm ent to the state
\ ~ rbitrariness or mala fides.
.
,. services ~nd advises the government; when
consulted, on promoti«;>n' and disciplinary
~ The additional fun ctions relating to the
matters. It is not concerned with the c1asservices of the state can be conferred on the
SPSC by the state legislature. The state legissification of services, pay and service condi·
tions, cadre
management, training and so on.
\ lature can also place the personnel system
,
These matters are handled by the Department
o f , any local authority, corporate body or
of Personnel or the General Administration
public. institution within the jurisdiction of
the
, SPSC. Hen ce,' the jurisdiction of the SPSC Department. Therefore, the SPSC is only a
can be extended by an Act made by the state
central recruiting agency in the state while
le'gisla ture.
the Department of Personnel or the General

aU

t

\

t =::..c:=______________

.

I,

,

430 ,r(! Indian Polity
Admini stration Department is the centra l
perso nn el agency in the state.
The role of SPSC is not only limited, but
also recommendations made by it are only of
advisory nature and hence, not binding on
the gove rnm e nt. It is up to the state government to accept or reject that advice. Further,
the government can a lso make ru les which
regulate th e scope of the advisory fun ctio ns
of the SPSC',
Also, the emergence of State Vigilance
Com mi ss ion (S VC) affected the role of SPSC
in discip li nary matte rs. T his is beca use both
are consu lted by the governm e nt while taking
di sc iplinary action against a civi l servant.
The problem ar ises when the two bodies
tender co nflicting advice. However, the SPSC,
being an independent constitutional body,
has an edge over the SVC.
It must be noted here that the SPSC is consulted by the governor whil e framing rules fo'r
appointment to judicial se rvice of the state
other than the posts of district judges. In thi s
regard, th e co nce rned state high court is also
consulted.
4Such rules are known as the SPSC (Exem ption from
Consu ltation) Regulations.

JOINT STATE PUBLIC SERVICE
COMMISSION
The Co nst itution makes a provision for the
estab li shment of a Joint State Public Service
Co mmi ss ion (J SPSC) for two or more states.
While the UPSC a nd the SPSC are c reated
directly by the Con stitution, a J SPSC can
be created by an ac t of Parliament on the
requ es t of the state legislatures concerned.
Thus, a JSPSC is a statutory and not a co nstitutio na l body.
The chair man a nd members of a J SPSC are
appo inted by the Pres ide nt. They hold office
for a term of six years o r until they attain the
age of62 years, whichever is earlier. They can
be suspended or removed by the President.
They can al so resign from their offices at a ny
tim e by su bmittin g their resignation letters
to the Pres ide nt.
The number of members of a JSPSC and
their conditions of se rvice are dete rmined by
the Presid e nt.
A JSPSC prese nts its annual performa nce
re port to ea ch of the concerned state governors. Each governor places the report before
the state leg islat ure.

Table 45.1 Articles Related to the SPSC at a Glance
Article No

3 15

Subject milller

Public Service Commissions for the Union and for the states

CHAPTER "

46

Finance Commission

ic1e 280 of the Constitution of India
provides for a Finance Commission as
quasi·judicial body. It is constituted
by the President of India every fifth year or at
such earlier time as he/ she considers necessary.
Till now, fifteen Finance Commissions have
been constituted. The name of the commissions, the years in which they were constituted
and submitted their reports, and the names of
the chairman are given in Thble 46.1.

A;

~ COMPOSITION
The Finance Commission consists of a chairman and four other members to be appointed
by the President. They hold office for such
period as specified by the President in his/her
order. They are eligible for reappointment.
The Constitution authorises the Parliament
to determine the qualifications of members
of the commission and the manner in which
they should be selected. Accordingly, the
Parliament has specified the qualifications
of the chairman and members of the commission I. The chairman should be a person
having experience in public affairs and the
four other members should be selected from
amongst the following:
1. A judge of high court or one qualified to
be appOinted as one.
2. A person who has specialised knowledge of finance and ac~ounts of the
government.
3. A person who has wide experience in
financial matters and administration.
'Vide the Finance Commission Act, 1951.

4. A person who has special knowledge of
economics.

~ FUNCTIONS
The Finance Commission is required to make
recommendations to the President of Indja
on the foHowing matters:
1. The distribution of the net proceeds of
taxes to be shared between the Centre
and the states, and the allocation between
the states of the respective shares of such
proceeds.
2. The principles that should govern the
grants-in·aid to the states by the Centre
(Le., out of the consolidated fund ofindia),
3. The measures needed to augment the con·
solidated fund of a state to supplement
the resources of the panchayats and the
municipalities in the state on the basis
of the recommendations made by the
state finance commission 2 •
4. Any other matter referred to it by the
President in the interests of sound finance.
Till 1960, the commission also suggested
the grants give.n to the,States of Assam, Bihar,
Odisha and West Bengal in lieu of assignment
of any share of the net proceeds in each year
of export duty on jute and jute products.
These grants were to be given for a temporary
period of ten years from the commencement
of the Constitution.
~is function was added by the 73rd and 74th Con-

stitutional Amendment Acts of 1992, which have
granted constitutional status and protection on the
panchayats and the municipalities respectively,

432

,(J Indian Polity

The commi ss ion submits its report to the
Pres id e nt. He/s he lays it before both t he
Houses of Pa rli ament along with an explanatory me morandum as to the action taken 011
its recommendation s.

t ADVISORY ROLE

It must be clarified here that th e recomm en dations made by the Finance Co mmissio n
a re onl y of advisory nature and hen ce, not
bind ing on t he gove rnm en t. It is up to the
Union govern ment to imp leme nt its recommendations on grunting money to the states.
1b put it in other words, ' It is nowhere laid
down in the Constitution that the recom mendati o ns of the comm issio n shall be bin ding
upon the Government of Indi a or that it
would give rise to a lega l right in favour of
the benefic iary states to receive the mon ey
recom me nded to be offered to them by the
Comm issio n,J.

3D. D. B..1 su, I lIrmdt/criml /0 tlu: Gotlslitution of Illdia,
Wadhw<I 19lh Ed ition, 2001 , p. 33 1.

As rightly observed by 1)1: P. V. R..1.janwllnar,
the Chairn1<l1l of the Fourth Finance Co mmi ssio n, uSin ce the Finan ce Com miss ion is
a constitution a l body expected to be quasijudicial, its recommendations shou ld not
be turn ed down by the Gove rnm ent of India
unl ess there are very co mpe ll ing reason s".
T he Const itu tio n of In d ia envisages th e
Finance co mmi ss ion as th e balancing whee l
of fi sca l fede ralism in India . Howeve r, till
2014, its role in the Centre-state fisca l
re lations was unde rmin ed by the erstw hil e
Planning Commission, a non-co nst itutional
and a non-statutory bod y. The Dr. P. V.
Rajamannar also observed that there was an
overlappi ng of functio n s and respon s ibiliries betwee n the Finance Co mmi ssio n and
th e erstwhil e Pl a nning Co mmi ss ion in federa l fiscal tran sfe rs'" In 2015 , the Planning
Commi ss ion wa s re pla ced by a new body
called N ITI Aayog (Nat iona l In stitut io n for
'Thll1sfonni ng India).
~Report of the Fourth Fi nance Comm ission , New

Delhi , Government of India, 1965, pp. 88-90.

Table 46.1 Finance Commissions Appointed so far
Finance
CommiSSion

Chairman

A ppOinted In

SubmItted
Report In

Pen od of Implementation
of Report

First

K.C. Neogy

1951

1952

1952- 57

Second

K.Sonthanam

1956

1957

1957-62

A.K. Chanda

1960

1961

1962- 66

Or. P.Y. Rajamannar

1964

1965

1966-69

Fifth

Mahavir Tyagi

1968

1969

1969-74

Sildh

Srahemananda Reddy

1972

1973

1974-79

Seventh

J.M . Shelat

1977

1978

1979-84

E1gf1Ih

V.S. Chevon

1982

1_

1984-89

Ninth

N.K.P. Salve

1987

1989

1989-95

Tenth

K.c. Pent

1992

1994

1995-2000

Eleventh

A.M. Khusro

1998

2000

2000-2005

Dr. C. Ranger.jan

2002

2004

2005-2010

Third

. Finance Commission

Flilance

Chimman

Appointed In

CommiSSion

, Thirteenth

Submitted

Period of Implementat ion

Report In

of Report

Fifteemh

. Tol>l0 46.2

,

Article No

- . _._--

2007

2009

2010-2015

V.V. Reddy

20'3

20'4

20'5- 2020

N.K. Singh

2017

2019 & 20205

2020-2026

Dr. Vijay Kelkar
-~

\}

~ 433

"

Articles Related to Finance Commission at a Glance
SubJect'matter

280.

Finance Commission

281 .

Recommendations of the Finance Commission

!JOn December 5, 2019, the Commission submitted its first report co nta ining recommendations for the year
2020-21. Again, on November 9, 2020, the Commission submitted its second report containing recommendations for the period 2021-22 to 2025-26.

,.

.

CHAPTER

47

Goods and Services
Tax Council

t ESTABLISHMENT
The JOist Ame ndm ent Act of 2016 paved th e
way for the introduction of a new tax regime
(i.e. goods and serv ices tax - GST) in the
cou ntry. The smooth and efficie n t administration of this tax requires co-operation and
co-o rdina tion between the centre and the
states. In o rder to fa cilitate this consultation
process, the amendment provided for the
esta blishm en t of a Goods and Services Thx
Councilor the GST Council.
The amendment inserted a new Article 279-A
in the Constitutio n . This Article e mpowered
the President to constitute a GST Council by
an order. Accordingly, the President issued the
order in 2016 and constitu ted the Council l ,
The Secretariat of th e Co un ci l is located
at New Delhi. The Un ion Reven ue Secretarl
acts as the ex-officio Sec reta ry to the Cou nc il.

t VISION AND MISSION
WhiJe di scharging its functions, the Council
is to be guided by the need for a harmoni sed
structure of CST and th e develop ment of a
ha rm oni sed national market for goods a nd services. Further, the Council has to determin e the
procedure in the performan ce of its fun ctions.
The vision and mission of th e Co un cil are
as fo llows:
Vision: 'Tb establish the hi ghest sta ndards of
co-operative federat io n in the funct io n ing of

IThe Presidential orde r was issued on 15 Septembe r
2016.

20epartment of Revenue, the Ministry of Finan ce,
Government ofInd ia.

the Counci l, whi ch is the first co nstitutional
fede ra l body vested with powers to ta ke a ll
major decisions relating to CST.
Mission: Evolving by a process of wider consu ltation , a CST stru cture, which is information techn ology-drive n a nd user frie ndl y.

t COMPOSITION
The Council is a joint forum of the ce ntre
a nd the states an d cons ists of th e following
m e mbers:
(a) The Union Fin ance Minister as t h e
Chairperson
(b) The Union Min ister of State in-c harge of
Revenue or Finance
(e) The Minister in-charge of Finance or
Taxation or a ny other Mini ster nom inated by eac h state government
The m e mb e rs of the Co un ci l from t h e
states have to ch oose one amongst the mselves
to be th e Vice-Chairperson of the Cou nc il.
Th ey can a lso decide hi s term .
T h e Union Cabinet a lso de c ided to
includ e the Chairperso n of the Cent ral
Board of Indirect Thxes a nd Customs (CBlC)
as a permanent invitee (non-voti ng) to a ll
proceedings of the Council.

t WORKING
T he decisions of th e Coullcil are ta ken at its
meetings. One-ha lf of the tota l number of
members of the Cou nci l is the quorum for
co ndu ctin g a m eeting. Every decis ion of t he
Counc il is to be taken by a majority of not
less thatl th ree-fourths of the weighted votes

Goods ond Services Tax CDundl

of the m embe rs present and voting at the
m eeting. The decision is taken in accordan ce
with the following principles:
(i) The vote of the cenn:al government shall
have a weightage of one-third of the total
votes cast in that meeting.
(ii) The votes of all the sta te governments
co mbined shaH have a weightage of
two-thirds of the total votes cast in that
meeting.
Any act or proceedings of the Coun cil will
not become invalid on the fo11owjng grounds:
(i) any vacancy or defect in the constitution
of the Council; or
(ii) a ny defect in the appointment of a person as a member of the Co un cil; or
(iii) any procedural irregularity of the Council
not affe cting the merits of the case.

t FUNCTIONS
The Council is required to make reco mmendati ons to th e ce ntre and the states on the
followin g matters:
(a) The taxes, cesses and surcharges levied
by the centre, the states and the local
bodies that would get merged in GST.
(b) The goods and services that may be subjected to GST or exempted from GST.
(c) Model GST Laws, principles oflevy, apportionment of GST levied on suppli es in
the course of inter-state trade or commerce and the principles that govern
Itbe place of suppl y.
(d) Th e threshold limi t of turnover below
which goods and se rvi ces may b e
exempted from GST.
(e) The rates induding floor rates with bands
ofGST.
(f) Any special rate or rates for a specifi ed
period to ra ise additional resources during any natural calamity or disaster.

~ 435

(g) Special provision with respect to the states
of Arunach al Pradesh , Assam, Jammu
and Kashmir 3 , Ma nipur, Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura,
Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand.
(h) Any oth er m atter relating to GST, as the
Co uncil may decide.

t OTHER FUNCTIONS
In addition to the above, the Coun cil has the
following other fun ction s:
1. The Council shall recommend the date on
which the GST may be levied on pe.troleum crude, high speed diesel, motor
spirit (petrol ), natural gas and aviation
turbine fuel.
2. When there is a dispute with respect to its
recomm endations or their implementation, the Council sh all establish a mechanism to adjudicate upon th e dispute:
(a) between the centre and one or more
states; or
(b) between the centre and any state or
states on one side and one or m ore
other states on the oth er side; or
(e) between two or more states.
3. The Council has to recommend the compensation to the states forloss of revenue
arisi ng on account of introduction of GST
for a period of five years. Based on this
recommendation , the Parliament determines the compensation. Accordingly,
the Parl iament enacted the law in 20174 •
11te Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019,
bifurcated the erstwhile state of Jammu and Kashmir
into two separate Union territories, namely, the
Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir and the
Union territory of Ladakh .
~e Goods and Services Th.x (Compe nsation to
States) Act, 2017.

CHAPTER

48

National Commission
for SCs

he National Commissio n for Sc hedu led Castes (SCs) is a constitutional
body in the sen se that it is di rectl y
establ ished by Article 338 of the Constit uti on.
On the other ha nd, the other national commi ss ions like the Na tion al Co mm issio n for
Wo men ( 1992), the ational Co mmi ss ion
for Mi norit ies ( 1993), the N<lt iona l Hum an
Rights Co mmission (1993) and the Nationa l
Com m ission fo r Protect io n of Child Rights
(2007) are statutory bodi es in the se nse that
th ey are established by a cts of the Parli a ment.

T

t EVOLUTION
Or iginall y, Articl e 338 of the Co nstitution
provided for the a ppointm ent ofa Special Officer fo r Scheduled Castes (SCs) and Schedu led
Tribes eSTs) to in vestigate all matters relating
to the constitutional safeguards for the 8Cs
and STs and to re port to the Preside nt on t heir
working. He/ she was designated as the Co mmi.ssioner for 8Cs and STh a nd assign ed the
said duty.
In 1978, the Governme nt (thro ugh a Resolution) set up a non-statutory mu lti-member
Co mmi ssio n for SCs and 815; the Office of
Commissioner for SCs a nd S15 a lso continued
to ex ist.
In 1987, th e Government (throug h another
Resolution ) mod ifi ed t he fun ction s of the
Com miss ion and renamed it as th e Nationa l
Co mmission for SCs and STs 1•
l it was ma de a s a Nntional Level Advisory Body to

advise the Government on broa d poli cy issues and

levc ls of deve lopmcnt ofSCs and STs.

Later, the 65th Constitutional Amendment
Act of 1990 2 provided for the establi shm ent ofa
lugh level multi-m ember Natio na l Co mmission
for SCs and 8Th in th e place of a singl e Special
Officer for SCs and rn. This co nstitutional
body replaced the Com mission er for 8Cs and
SIS as well a s the Comm ission set up under the
Resolution of 1987.
Again, the 89th Constitutio na l Am endment
Act of 20033 bifurcated the combined a tional
Commissi on for 8Cs and 5Th in to two separate bodies, na mely, Nationa l Com miss ion
for Sc heduled Castes ( under Article 338) and
Nat io na l Co mmi ss ion for Sched uled Tribes
(under Articl e 338-A).
The separate National Com m i55ion fo r SCs
came into existe nce in 2004. It consists of a
chairperson, a vice-cha irperso n and three other
membe rs. They are appOinted by the President
by warrant under his hand and seal. Their conditions of service and ten ure of office are also
determined by the President. Under the Rules 4
made by the Preside nt, they ho ld office for a
term of three years. They are not e lig ible for
appoi ntme nt for more than two terms.

t FUNCTIONS
The fun c tion s of the Co mmi ss ion are:
(a) 'Tb investigate a nd monitor all matters
re la t ing to the co nst it ut ional and oth e r
2rhc Act ca me into force on 12-03- 1992.
lrrhe Act c.n me into force o n 19-02·2004.
"The Na tional Com miss ion for Scheduled Castes
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson ond Me mbers (Conditions ofScrvicc and 1Cnurc) Rules, 2004.

Nationol Commission for SCs

legal safeguards for the SCs and to evaluate their working;
(b) 1b inquire into specific complaints with
respect to the deprivation of rights and
safeguards of the SCSi
(e) 1b participate and advise on the planning
process of socio-economic development
of the SCs and to evaluate the progress
of their development under the Union
or a state;
(d) 1b present to the President, annually
and at such other times as it may deem
fit, reports upon the working of those
safeguards;
(e) 'Ib make recommendations as to the measures that should be taken by the Union
or a state for the effective implementation of those safeguards and other
measures for the protection, welfare
and socia-economic development ofthe
SCSi and
(f) 1b discharge such other functions in
relation to the protection, welfare and
development and advancement of the
SCs as the President may specify.

t REPORT
The commission presents an annua l report
to the President. It can also submit a report
as and when it thinks necessary.
The President places all such reports before
the Parliament, along with a memorandum
explaining the action taken on the recommendations made by the Commission. The
memorandum should also contain the reasons for the non-acceptance of any of such
recommendations.
The President also forwards any report
of the Commission pertaining to a state
government to the state governor. The governor places it before the state legislature,
along with a memorandum explaining the
action taken on the recommendations of the
Commission. The memorandum should also

~ 437

contain the reasons for the non-acceptance
of any of such recommendations.

t POWERS
The Commission is vested with the power to
regulate its own procedure.
The Commission, while investigating any
matter or inquiring into any complaint, has all
the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in
particular in respect of the following matters:
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance
of any person from any part of India
and examining him / her on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production
of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
Cd) requisitioning any public record from any
court or office;
(e) issuing summons for the examination of
witnesses and documents; and
(fJ any other matter which the President may
determine.
The Central government and the state
governments are required to consult the Commission on all major policy matters affecting
the SCs.
The Commission is also required to discharge similar functions with regard to the
AnglO-Indian Community as it does with
respect to the SCs. In other words, the Commission has to investigate all matters relating
to the constitutional and other legal safeguards for the AnglO-Indian Community and
report to the President upon their workingS.
Till 2018, the commission was also required
to discharge similar functions with regard
to the other backward classes (OBCs). It was
relieved from this responsibility by the l02nd
Amendment Act of 2018.
5Clause 10 of Article 338 reads as follows: "In
this article, references to the Scheduled Castes
shall be construed as including references to the
Anglo-Indian Community".

CHAPTER

49

National Commission
for STs

L

ike the Nationa l Co mmission for Schedules Castes (SCs), the National Commi ssion for Scheduled 1Tibes (5Th) is
a lso a constituti ona l body in t he se nse that
it is directl y es tablished by Article 338-A of
the Constitution.

t SEPARATE COMMISSION FOR STS

The Nation a l Commiss ion for SCs and 5Th
came into being consequent upon passin g of
th e 65th Co n st itutional Amendment Act of
1990' , Th e Co mmi ss ion was established under
Article 338 of the Co nstitutio n ,.villi the objective of monitoring a ll the safeguards provided
for the SCs and 5Th under the Co nstitution or
other laws.
Geographi cally a nd cultura ll y, the 515 are
different from the SCs and th eir proble ms
are a lso diffe rent from those of SCs. In 1999,
a new Ministry of Tribal Affairs was created
to provide a sharp focu s to the welfare and
development of the STh. It wa s fe lt necessary
that the Ministry oflTiba l Affa irs should coo rdina te a ll activities re lating to the STh as it
wou ld not be administratively feasibl e for the
Mini stry of Social Justice and Em powerme nt
to perform th is role 2 •
Hence, in order to safegua rd t he interests
of the STh more effectively, it was proposed to
set up a sepa rate National Co mmission for S'lS
by bifurcating the existing co mbin ed Na tional
Co mmi ss ion for SCs and STh. This was done
ITh e Act ca m e in to fo rce on 12-03- 1992.

l-rhe Min istry of Social J ustiCe a nd Empowerm ent
CQ-()rdina tes all activities relati ng to t he SCs.

by passin g the 89th Co n stitutional Amendme nt Act of 2003 3 . This Act further amended
Article 338 and in serted a new Article 338-A
in the Constitution.
The se parate Nationa l Co mmission for S1's
ca me into ex iste nce in 2004 . It co n sists of a
chairperson, a vice-ch airperson and three
other members. T hey a re appoi n ted by th e
Pres ident by warrant under his/ h er hand and
sea l. Their conditions of se rvice and tenure of
office are also determined by the Preside n t.
Under th e Ru les4 made by th e President, they
hold office for a te rm of three years. They a re
not eligible for appointment for m ore than
two terms.

t FUNCTIONS

The fun ctions of the Co mmissio n are:
(a) Th i n vesti ga te and mon itor a ll matters
relating to th e co nst ituti o na l and other
lega l safeguards for the STh a nd to eva luate the ir worki ng;
(b) 1b inquire in to spec ific co mpla ints with
resp ect to th e deprivation of ri ghts and
sa feguards of t he STh;
(c) 1b partic ipate and advise on the planning
process of socio-eco nom ic developm e n t
of the STh and to eva luate the progress
of their development under the Union
or a state;
(d) 1b prese nt to the Pres id ent, annua lly
and at suc h oth e r times as it may dee m

3.y-hc Act came into force o n 19-02-2004 .
'The Na tiona l Co mmi ssion for Scheduled l'ribes
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members (Condilions orScn 'ice and 'Tenure) Rules, 2004.

National Commission for STs

fit, reports upon the working of those
safeguards;
(e) 1b make recommendations as to the measures that should be taken by the Union
or a state for the effective implementation
of those safeguards and other measures
for the protection, welfare and socioeconomic development of the SIS; and
(f) 1b discharge such other functions in
relation to the protection, welfare and
development and advancement of the
8Th as the President may specify.

t OTHER FUNCTIONS
In 2005, the President specified the fo llowing
other functions of the Commission in relation
to the protection, welfare and development
and advancement of the 8Th5 :
(i) Measures to be taken Over conferring
ownership rights in respect of minor
forest produce to STh living in forest
areas
(ii) Measures to be taken to safeguard rights
of the tribal communities over mineral
resources, water resources etc., as per
law
(ill) Measures to be taken for the development of tribals and to work for more
viable livelihood strategies
(iv) Measures to be taken to improve the
efficacy of relief and ,rehabilitation
measures for tribal groups displaced
by devel<;?pment projects
(v) Measures to be taken to prevent alienation of tribal people from land and
to effectively rehabilitate such people
in whose case alienation has already
taken place
(vi) Measures to be taken to elicit maximum
cooperation and involvement of tribal
communities for protecting forests and
undertaking social .afforestation
(vii) Measures to be taken to ensure full
implementation of the Provisions
of Panchayats (Extension to the
Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996
-"The Nat.jonal Commission for the Scheduled 'fribes
(Specification of. Other Functions) Rules, 200S.

'tt 439

(viii) Measures to be taken to reduce and ultimately eliminate the practice of shifting
cultivation by tribals that lead to their
continuous disempowerment and degradation of land and the environment

t REPORT

The Commission presents an annual report
to the President. It can also submit a report
as and when it thinks necessary.
The President places all such reports before
the Parliament, along with a memorandum
explaining the action taken on the recommendations made by the Commission. The
memorandum should also contain the reasons for the non-acceptance of any of such
recommendations.
The President also forwards any report of the
Commission pertaining to a state government to
the state governor. The governor places it before .
the state legislature, along with a memorandum
explaining the action taken on the recommendations of the Commission. The memorandum
should also contain the reasons for the nonacceptance of any of such recommendations.

t POWERS
The Commission is vested with the power to
regulate its own procedure.
The Commission, while investigating any
matt.er or inquiring into any complaint, has all
the powers of a civi1 court trying a suit and in
particular in respect of the follOwing matters:
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance
of any person from any part of India
and examining him/her on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production
of any document;
(e) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record from any
court or office;
(e) issuing summons fO.r the examination of
witnesses and documents; and
(f) any other matter which the President may
determine.
The Central government and the state governments are required to consu1t the Commission
on all major policy matters affecting the S'Th.

CHAPTER

50

National Commission
for BCs

~ ESTABLISHMENT
In the MandaI easel judgem e nt ( 1992), the
Suprem e Court directed the ce ntral government to con stitute a permanent statu tory
body to examine the com plaints of underinclus io n , over-ind usia n or non-inclusion of
any class of citizens in th e li st of backward
classes. Accordingly, t he National Com mi ssion for Backward Cla sses (NCBC) was set up
in 1993 2,
La ter, th e 102nd Amendment Act of 2018
co nfe rred a con stitutional sta tus on th e Co mmi ssion . For this purpose, the a m endment
inserted a new Article 338-B in the co nstitu-

tion. Hence, the Commission ceased to be a
sta tutory body and became a con stitution al

body' .
Further, t he scop e of fun ctions assigned to
the Com mi ssion is a lso enlarged under the
n ew dispensation. This was done in order
to safeguard the in te rests of the soci ally and
educationally backward classes more effectivel/. In other wo rds, the con stitutional status of the n ew Com mi ssion is at par with the
National Co mmission for Scheduled Castes
(NCSC) a nd the National Commiss ion for
Scheduled Thibes (NeST).
' Ind ra Sawhney vs. Un ion of Ind ia ( 1992).

Vide the National Com mission for Backward Classes
Act, 1993.
1'he National Commission for Backward Classes
(Repeal) Act, 2018, repealed the National Comm ission
for Backward Classes Act, 1993.
4rr"he i02nd Amendment Act of 2018 inserted a new
Article 342-A enabling the President to specify the
socia lly and educationally backward classes.
2

T he Commiss ion consists of a cha irperson,
a vice-chairperso n and three other members.
They are appointed by the President by warra nt und er hi s/ h e r hand an d sea l. Th ei r
cond ition s of serv ice and tenure of office
are a lso determined by th e Presi de n t. Under
the Rules 5 made by the President, they hold
office for a term of three yea rs. Th ey are not
el igib le for ap pointment for more than two
terms.

~ FUNCTIONS
The functions of the Comm iss ion a re th e
followi ng:
(3) To invest igate a nd monitor a ll matters
relating to the con stitution a l a nd other
legal safeguards for the socia ll y a nd
educatio nally ba ckwa rd classes a nd to
evaluate their work.
(b) 1b inquire into sp ecific complain ts with
respect to the deprivation of rights and
safeguards of the social1y a nd edu cationa ll y backward classes.
(c) To p a rti cipate and advise on th e socioeconomi c developm ent of the soc ially
and educationally backwa rd classes and
to evaluate the progress of their developme nt under the Union or a state.
(d) 10 present to the Preside nt, a nnua lly
a nd at su ch other times as it may deem
fit, reports upon the worki n g of those
sa feguards.
National Commission for Backward Classes
Chairperson , Vice-Chairperson a nd Members (Condi-

~e

tions of Service and "lenure) Rules, 201 8.

National Commission for 8Cs

(e) 1b make recommendations as to the
measures that should be taken by the
Union or a state fo.r the effective implementation of those safeguards and other
measures for the protection, welfare
and socio-economic development of the ~
socially and educationally backward
classes.
(f) 1b discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare, development and advancement of the socially
and educationally backward classes as
the President may specify.

t REPORT

r

The Commission presents an annual report
to the President. It can also submit a report
as and when it thinks necessa ry.
The President places all such reports before
the Parliament, along with a memorandum
explaining the action taken on the recommendations made by the Commission. The
memorandum should also contain the reasons for the non-acceptance of any of such
recommendations.
The President also forwards any report of
the Commission pertaining to a state government to the state government6 (and not to
the state governor) : The government places
it before the state legislature, along with a
memorandum explaining the action taken
on the recommendations of the Commission.
lause 7 of Article 3388.

6C

~ 441

The memorandum should also contain the
reasons for the non-acceptance of any of such
recommendations.

t POWERS
The Commission is vested with the power to
regulate its own procedure.
The Commission, while investigating any
matter or enquiring into any complaint, has
all the powers of a civil court trying a suit
and in particular in respect of the following
matters:
(a) Sunimoning and enforcing the attendance
of any person from any part of India
and examining him / her on oath
(b) Requiring the discovery and production
of any document
(c) Receiving evidence on affidavits
(d) Requisitioning any public record from
any court or office
(e) Issuing summons for the examination of
witnesses and documents
(f) Any other matter which the President
may determine
The central government and the state governments are required to consult the Commission on all major policy matters affecting the
socially and educationally backward classes.
However, the IOSth Amendment Act of 2021
exempted the state governments from .this consultation with the Commission with respect to
the preparation and maintenance of the list of
socially and educationally backward classes for
their own purposes.

CHAPTER

51

Special Officer for
Linguistic Minorities

t CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
Originall y, th e Co n stitu tion of India did
n ot make any provi sion with respect to the
l
Spec ia l Office r for Lingui st ic Minorities ,
Later, th e States Reorgani sation Commi ssio n
(1953-55) made a reco mm e ndation in thi s
regard. Accordi ngly, the Seve nth Con st itutional Am en dment Act of 1956 in serted a
new Articl e 350-8 in Part XV II of the Constitution . Th is article co ntains the follO\ving
provi s ion s:
1. Th e re sho uld be a Specia l Officer for
Lingui s ti c Minorities. He is to b e
a pPo inted by the Preside n t of India.
2 . It would be th e duty of the Specia l Office r
to in vestigate a ll ma tte rs rela ting to
th e safeguards provided for lin guistic
minoriti es und er t h e Co n stitution.
H e would r e port to th e President
upon tho se m atters at s u c h interva ls as the President m ay direct. The
Preside nt s hould pla ce a ll such repo rts
befo re each House of Parliament a nd
se nd to the governm ents of the states
co n ce rne d.
It must be noted he re t hat the Co nstitution
does not spec ify the qu a lifi ca tions, tenure,
sa la ries a nd a llowa nces, se rvice conditions
a nd procedure for removal of the Special Office r for Linguisti c Minoriti es.
lA lingui stic mino rity is a g roup of people whose

mother tongue is different fro m that of the
majority in th e sta te or part of a state. Thus, the
lingui stic minoriti es are determined on a statewise basis.

COMMISSIONER FOR LINGUISTIC
MINORITIES
In pursuance of th e provision of Article 350-B
of the Co nstitution, th e office of the Special
Officer for Lingui stic Minorities was created
in ] 957. He/ she is des ignated as the Commissione r for Linguistic Minorities (CLM).
The CLM has his/ h e r headquarters in New
Delhi 2 . He / she has th ree regional offi ces at
Be lgaum (Ka rnataka), Che nnai (Th mil Nadu)
a nd Kolkata (West Be nga l). Each is hea ded by
a n Assista nt Co mmi ssio ne r.
The CLM is ass isted at headquarte rs by De puty Co mmi ss ion er a nd a n Assista nt Comm issione r. I-Ie/ she main tains liai son with the Sta te
Governm ents a nd Union Thrri tori es through
noda l officers a ppo inted by t hem.
At th e Ce n t ral level, th e CLM fa ll s unde r
th e Mini st ry of Minori ty Affairs. He nce,
he / sh e submits the ann ua l re ports or other
reports to the Pres ide n t through the Union
Mino ri ty Affairs Ministe r.

t ROLE'
The CLM inte racts with t he States/ UTh o n a ll
the matters pertaining to the issues co ncern·
ing imple me ntation ofthe Constitutional and
Natio na lly Agreed Safeguards provided to th e
lingui sti c mi n oriti es.
Zrrhe Hea dquarters was established in 1957 at
New De lhi. After a bri e f period, it was shifted to
Allahabad and now, it has bee n shi fted bac k to
New Delhi in 2015.
JA nnual Repon 202 1-22, Ministry of Minority Affairs,
Govern me nt of Indiu, pp. 40- 4 1.

I
•
Speea' Officer (or Unguistk Minorities

•1

,)

,,
,

The eLM organ isatio n takes up all matte rs
relatin g to safeguards for lingui stic minor ities
broug ht to their notice by lingui stic minor ity
indivi duals, groups, assoc iation s or organ isatio ns. Furthe r, the e LM perso nally visits
lingui sti c minor ity areas and edu cation al
institu tions for an on-the-spot assess ment of
the status of imple menta tion of the schem e
of safegu ards.
In this co nnecti on, the e LM holds discus sion s, when requir ed, with the Chi ef Minis ters
a nd Gover nors of the States and the Chief
Minis ters and Lt. Gover nors of the U'IS. He/
sh e also holds di scuss ion s a t the highe st
levels of admin istrati on viz, Chief Secret ary,
Princi pa l Secret ary (Educ ation) a nd Princi pa l
'Secretaries of the Depar tment s entrus ted with
the monit oring of the impl e m ~ntatio n of the
schem e of safeguards for lingui stic minor ities.

t VISION AND MISSION
The vision and mi ssion of the CLM are mentioned here. 4
Visio n
Stream lining and streng then ing imple menta tion machi nery and mecha nism for effect ive
imple menta tion of the Const itutio nal safeguard s for the Lingu istic Minor ities, thereb y
ensur ing protection of th e rights of speakers
of the minor ity langu ages so as to provid e
them equal oppor tuniti es for inclus ive and
integr ated develo pment .
Missi on
1b ensur e that all the states /U.T.s effectively
imple ment the Const itutio nal safegua rds and
"This inform ation is obtained fro m the official
website of the Comm issione r for Lingui stic
Mi noritie s in Jndia.

~ 443 .

the nation ally agreed sch eme of safeguards for
the lingui stic minor ities for provid ing them
equal oppor tunitie s for inclus ive develo pmen t.

t fUNCTIONS AND OBJECTIVES
In more detail , the fun ctions and obj ectives
of the CLM are as follows 5 :
Funct ions
1. To invest igate all matte rs relate d to

sa fegua rds provid ed to the lingui sti c
minor ities
2. 1b subm it to the President of India, the
report s on the status of imple menta tion
of the Con stituti onal and the n ationally agreed safegu a rds for the lingui sti c
minor ities
3. 1b monit or the imple menta tion of safeguards throug h questi onnai res, visits,
confe rences, se minars, meetings, review
mech anism , etc

Objec tives
1. 1b provid e equal oppor tunitie s to the lin-

guisti c minor ities for inclusive development and nation al integr ation
2 . 1b spread aware n ess amon gst the linguisti c minor ities about the safegu ards
availa ble to them
3. 1b ensure effective imple menta tion of the
safegu ards provid ed for the lingui stic
minor ities in the Co nstitu tion and other
safegu ards, which are agreed to by the
states /U.T.s
4. 1b handl e the representati ons for redress
of grieva nces related to the safegu ards
for lingui stic minor ities
5lbid.

Comptroller and
Auditor General
of India

T

he Constitution of India (Article 148)
provides fo r an independent office of
the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India (CAG). He/ she is the head of the Indian
Audit a nd Accounts Department 1• He/ she is
the guardian of the public purse and controls
the entire finan cial system of the country at
both the levels-the Centre and the state. Hi s!
her duty is to uphold the Constitution of India
and laws of Parliament in the fi eld of financial
administration. This is the reason why Dr. B.R.
Arnbedkar sa id that the CAG shall be the most
important Officer under the Con stitution of
India z. He/she is one of the bulwarks of th e
democratic system of government in India; the
others being the Supreme Court, the Electio n
Comm issio n and the Un ion Publi c Service
Comm ission .

t APPOINTMENT ANDTERM
Th e CAG is appo inted by the Preside nt of
India by a wa rran t under his/ h er hand and
sea l. The CAG, before taking over hi s/ her
office, makes and subscribes before the President an oath or affirmation:
1. to bear true faith and a ll egiance to the
Con stitution of India;
z. to uphold the sovere ignty and integrity
of Indi a;
3. to dul y and faithfull y and to the best of
hi s/ her ability, kn owledge a nd j udgement perform th e du t ies of hi s / her
IThe Indian Audi t and AccountS Department was
c reated during the British rule in 1753.
2Collstiruent Assembly Debates, Volume VIII , p. 405.

office withou t fear or favour, a ffecti on
o r ill-will; a nd
4. to uphold the Constitution and the laws.
He/ she holds office fo r a period of six years
or upto the age of 65 years, wh ichever is earlier2a . He/ she can res ign any time from his/
her office by addressin g the resignation letter
to the President. He/ she ca n a lso be rem oved
by the Presi dent on same gro unds a nd in the
same manner as a judge of the Supreme Court.
In other words, he/ she ca n be removed by the
President o n the basis of a resolution passed
to that effect by both the Ho uses of Parli ame nt
with special m ajority, either on the grou nd of
proved misbehavio ur or in capacity.

t INDEPENDENCE
T he Con stitutio n ha s made the foll owing
prov isions to safeguard a nd e nsure the ind epe ndence of CAG:
1. He/ she is provi ded with the security
of te nu re. He / s he can be rem oved
by the Pres ident onl y in accordan ce
with the procedure m ention ed in the
Co nstitutio n . Thus, he/ she does not ho ld
office till the pl easu re of the President,
though he/ she is apPOinted by him/ her.
Z. He/ she is not eli gible for furth er o ffi ce,
e ith er under the Governm ent of India or
of an y state, after he/ she ceases to hold
hi s/ he r offi ce.
3. His/ her sa lary and other sen 'icc conditi on s a re determ in ed by the Parl ia men t.
2aAs per the CAG's ( Duties, Powers and Conditions
of Serv ice ) Act, 1971.

Com troller and Auditor General of India

According to the Act made by the
Parliament, his/her salary is equal to
that of a judge of the Supreme Court3.
Neither his/her salary nor his/ her rights
in respect of leave of absence, pension or
age of retirement can be altered to hislher
disadvantage after his/her apPointment.
The conditions of service of persons serving in the Indian Audit and Accounts
Department and the administrative
powers of the CAG are prescribed by the
President after consultation with the GAG.
6. The administrative expenses of the office
of the CAG, including all salaries, allowances and pensions of persons serving
in that office are charged upon the
Consolidated Fund of India. Thus, they
are not subject to the vote of Parliament.

'{

~ DUTIES AND POWERS

,
'.

-,,,

,

,

The Constitution (Article 149) authorises the
Parliament to prescribe the duties and powers
of the CAG in relation to the accounts of the
Union and of the states and of any other
authority or body. Accordingly, the Parliament enacted the CAG's (Duties, Powers and
Conditions of Service) Act, 1971.
The duties arid functions of the CAG as laid
down by the Parliament and the Constitution
are:
1. He/she audits the accounts related to all
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India, cQnsolidated fund of each state
and consolidated fund of each union
territory having a Legislative Assembly.
2. He/ she audits aU transactions relating to
the Contingency Fund of India and the
Publi.c Account ofIndia as well as the contingency fund of each state and the public
account of each state.
3. He/she audits all trading, manufacturing,
profit and loss accounts,. balance sheets
and other subsidiary acco.u nts kepl by any
department of the Central Government
and state governments.
3 In 2018, the salary of a judge of the Supreme Court

had been fixed at ~2 . 50 lakh per month.

445

4. He/ she audits the receipts and expenditure of all bodies and auth.o rities substantially financed from the central or
state revenues.
5 . He/she audits the accounts of all bodies
and authorities receiving grants and
loans from the central and state govern· ment for specific purposes.
6 . He/she audits all receipts of the centre
and states and ensures that the rules and
procedures in this regard are designed to
secure an effective check on the assessment, collection and proper allocation
of revenue.
7. He/she audits the accounts of all stores
and stock kept in all the offices and
departments of the central and state
governments.
8. He/she audits the accounts of all
Government Companies in accordance
· with the provisions of the Companies Act.
9. He / she audits the accounts of all
Corporations whose statutes provide
for audit by him/her.
10 . He/ she audits the accounts of any other
body or authority when requested by the
President or Governor. For example, the
audit of local bodies.
11. He/she advises the President with regard
to prescription of the form in which the
accounts of the Centre and the states
· shall be kept (Article 150).
12. He/ she submits audit reports relating to
the accounts of the Centre to President,
who shall, in tum, place them before both
the Houses of Parliament (Article 151).
13. He/ she submits the audit reports relating
to the accounts of a state to governor,
who shall, in turn, place them before
the state legislature (Article 151).
14. He/she ascertains and certifies the net
proceeds of any tax or duty (Article 279).
His/ her certificate is final. The 'net proceeds' means the proceeds of a tax or a
duty minus the cost of collection.
15. He/ she acts as a guide, friend and phi1oso~
pher of the Public Accounts Committee
of the Parliament.

446

,r;J Indian Polity

16. He /sh e com pil es a n d mai n tain s t h e
accounts of state govern ments. In 1976 ,
he/ sh e was relieved of his/ h e r respon s ibi lities with regard to the co mpi lation
a nd m a i nte n a n ce of accounts of the
Ce ntral Governme n t due to t he separalion of accounts from audit, that is,

departm c nta lisatio n of aCCOll ll ts.

T h e CAG, in connect io n with the pe rforma nce of his/ he r audit duties, h<ls the follow-

ing powers:
( i) 1b inspect any office or depanme n t

whi ch is subject to his/ her audit
( ii) Th examine a ll transa ctions and question
th e pe rso n in cha rge of the offi ce or
depa r tm ent
( i ii) 1b ca ll for any records, pape rs and documents from a ny aud ited e ntity
(iv) 1b decide th e exte nt and ma n ner of aud it

t ROLE
The role of CAG is to u pho ld the Co nst itut io n of In d ia and th e laws of P~lrliame n t in
the fie ld of financial administration. The
accountabil ity of th e exec utive ( i.e., cou ncil of mi ni sters) to th e Pa rl iame nt in the
s ph ere of financial admin ist ratio n is sec ured
through audit reports of the CAG. The CAG
submits th.ree aud it reports to the President audit re p o r t o n app ropriat ion a cc ounts 4 ,
audit report on fina n ce accou n ts and aud it
re port on publi c u n derwkings. The Pres ident
lays t hese reports before both th e Ho uses of
Parliame n t. After th is, the Public Accou n ts
Co mmittee examines the m and reports its
fi n dings to the Parli ament.
According to th e above Act of 197 1, the
CAG has 'to ascertain whether moneys shown
in th e accounts as h aving bee n disbursed
wa s lega l1 y available for an d applicab le to
th e service or th e purpose to whi ch t h ey
have been appli ed or charged and wheth er
th e expenditure co n form s to th e author ity
""rhe appropriation accou l1ls compare the actua l
expenditure with the expenditure sa nctioned by
the Parliament through the Appropriation Act,
wh ile the finan ce accounts show the annual receipts
and d isbursemel1ls of the Un io n gover nment.

th at governs it '. In a dd it ion to t h is lega l a nd
regu latory audit, th e CAG can a lso conduct the
propriety audit, that is, he/ she ca n look into
t he 'wisdom, faithfulne ss and economy' of
governmen t expend iture and comm ent on the
wastefu ln ess and extravaga n ce of such expenditure. However, unlike the legal a n d regu latory <lUclit, whi ch is obligato ry on the part of
the CAG, th e propriety audit is di scret ionary.
Further, in 2006, th e Ministry of Finance,
Government of India , issued a n Office Memorandu m regard ing perfo rma nce audit by the
CAG. T he Memorandum clarified that the pcrformance audit f.'l ll s within the scope of a udit by
the CAG. The performa nce audit is co n ce rned
wit h th e a udit of eco n omy, efficiency a nd
effectiveness in the rece ipt a n d application of
pub lic funds. It is a comprehensive appraiS<1.1
of the progress and efficien cy of the execution
of deve lopment programm es. In t h is aud it, an
attempt is made (i) to assess and appraise to
wha t ex ten t the socia l a n d economic objectives
so ught to be achieved have been ach ieved and
at what cost; ( ii) (0 exami ne how far the agency
of de pa rtmen t is adequ ately disch arging its
finan cial res pon s ib ilities and (iii) to ascertai n
whethe r the schemes are being executed and
the ir operations co nducted economica ll y.
The CAG h as more freedom with rega rd to
aud it of expe n ditu re t han with regard to audit
of receipts, stores a nd stock. "W hereas in re lation to expenditure he/ she decides the sco pe
of audit and frames h is/ h er own a udit codes
a nd ma n ua ls, h e/sh e h as to proceed wit h
the approva l of th e execut ive government in
re lation to rules fo r the conduct of th e other
aud i ts.~5

T h e secret service expe n d iture is a li mitation on th e aud iting role of the CAG. In this
regard, the CAG ca nnot ca ll fo r particulars of
expe n d it u re incurred by the execut ive agencies, but has to accept a ce r tificate from th e
co mpetent administrative authority that the
expe n d iture has been so incurred un der h is/
her au thority.
ParliamcnwTy Financia l Control in
India, Second Edition . Bo m bay: l\'line rva Book Shop,

~Vatta l , P.K.,

1962, p. 235.

Comptroller and Auditor General of Indio

--

The Constitution of India visualises the
CAG to be Comptroller as well as Auditor
GeneraL However, in pract ice, the CAG is
fulfilling the ro le of an Auditor-Genera l
only and not that of a Co mptroll er. In other
words, 'the CAG ha s no contro l over the issue
of money from the co nsolidated fund and
many departments are a uthorised to draw
money by issuing cheq ues without specific
authority from the CAG, who is concerned
only at the audit stage when the expenditure
has already taken place,6. In this respect, the
CAG of India differs totally from the GAG of
Britain who has powers of both Comptroller
as well as Auditor General. In other words, in
Britain, the executive ca n draw money from
the public exchequer only with the approval
of the CAG.

~ CAG AND CORPORATIONS
The role of CAG in the auditing of pubHc co rporations is limited. Broadly speaking, his/
he r relationship with the public co rporation s
falls into the following three categories:
(i) Some corporations are audited totally and
directly by the CAG.
(ii) Some other corporations are audited by
private professional auditors who are
appointed by the Ce ntral Government
in consultation with the CAG. If necessary, the CAG ca n con duct supplementary audit.
(iii) Some other corporations are totally subjected to private audit. In other words,
their audit is done exclusively by private professional auditors and the CAG
does not come into the picture at aiL
They submit their annual reports and
accounts directl y to the Parliament
The role of the CAG in the auditing of Government companies is a lso limited. They are
audited by private auditors who are appointed
by the Government on the advise of the CAG.
The CAG can also undertake supplemenL:1.ry
audit or test audit of such co mpanies.
60 .0 . Basu, Introdu ction to the Cmlstitution of Illdia,

Wadhwa, 19th Edition, 2001, p. 198.

~ 447

~ APPLEBY' S CRITICISM
Pau l H Appleby (an American schoiar of
Public Administration), in his two reports
on Indian Administration, was very c ritica l of the role of CAG a nd attacked the
s ignifi ca nce of CAG's work 7 . He a lso suggested that the CAG s hould be relieved of
the responsibility of a udit. In other words,
h e reco mmended the abolition of the office
of CAG. Hi s points of c riticism of Indian
audit are as follows:
1. The function of the CAG in India, is in a
large measure, an inheritance from the
colonial rule.
2. The CAG is today a primary cause of
widespread and para lysing unwi ll ingness to decide and to act. Auditing ha s
a repressive and n egat ive influen ce.
3. The Parliament has a greatly exaggerated
notion of the importance of auditing
to Parliamentary respons ibility, and so
has failed to define the functions of the
CAG as the Constitution contemp lated
it would do.
4. The CAG's function is not really a very
important one. Auditors do not know
and cannot be ex pected to know very
much about good administration; their
prestige is highest with others who do
not know much about administration.
5. Auditors know what is auditing, which
is not administration; it is a necessa ry,
but a highl y pedestrian function with a
narrow perspective and a very limited
usefu I ness.
6. A deputy secretary in the departme nt
knows more about the problems in his/
her department than the CAG and his/
her entire staff.

~ CHALLENGES
The Second Administrative Reforms Commission of India (2005-2009) has identified the
challenges before the exte rnal audit conducted
' The two reports are: Public Administration in India

(1953) and Re-examination of India 's Admini strative System, 1956.

448 ,('f Indian Pality
by the CAG and explained th em in the foll owing ways:
There is no doubt that externa l a udit by the
GAG has co ntribu ted a great dea l in imp roving the fi nancial man agement in the country
keeping in vi ew the large number of Inspectio n Re ports issued, Audit Reports presen ted
to th e Parliame nt a nd the Sta te Legislatures
a nd the recoveri es mad e a t the insta n ce
of audit. In its Rep orts, Audit ra ises ma ny
importa nt issues relating inte r-a li a to weak
budgetary controls, defi cien cies in reve nue
coll ection , wastage of publi c resources, ina ppropr ia te accounti ng, poor returns on in vestm ents, divers ion of funds, system defi cien cies
and numerous instan ces ofpoc r ma nage ment
of public resources, etc.
Th ere is, however, a feeling th at the impact
and effective ness of external audit could be
furthe r enha nced. Some of the factors a nd per·
ception s, wh ich are impeding the effective ness
of ex ternal a udit by GAG are gi ven below:
(i) Detailed exa mination of paras incl uded
in t he Au dit Re ports b y Publi c
Accou n ts Co mmi ttee (PAC) is bare ly
about 15·20 against the total number
of 1000 to 1500 paras in cl ud ed in
the GAG's re ports submi tted to the
Parliam ent every yea r. Th e Mi nistr ies/
De partm ents take onl y those audit
pa ras seriou sly whi ch co m e up for
discussions in the PAG.
(ii) Th e Mini stries/ Departm ents a re sup·
posed to submi t Action Tdken Notes on
th e paras not di scussed. Such Actio n
taken Notes a re la rgely formal rath er
than substanti ve.
(iii) In the State Legislatures, there is a huge
pen den cy of Audit Paras to be exa mined by State PAGs. Som e of the pend·
in g paras a re 10 to 20 yea rs old. Delay
in exa mination of matters brough t out
in the Re ports reduces th ei r releva nce.
(iv) Thousa nds of in sp ection reports co nta inin g a huge number of observation s
8Seco nd Admi nistrative Refo rms Co mmissio n,
Government of India, Report. on Stre ngthen ing
f inancial Ma nagement Systems, 2009, pp. 14] -143.

are ly ing una ttended in the State and
Uni o n Governm e nt De p a rtmen ts.
Ma ny of th ese pa ras have reve nu e
im plica ti o n s. Th ere is h a rdl y a ny
accountability for not taking tim ely
action o n a udi t observa tio n s.
(v) There is a fee ling that the CAG's reports
are sometimes not timely because th ere
is substantial tim e ga p b etween occurrence of an irregularity and its re port·
ing by Audi t. It reviews programmes
after these have run for a few years.
GAG 's audit itself is post facto and by
th e time, the process of auditing and
re porting is compl eted, its findings
and recommendati on s may be too late
for co rrective action. Many transaction
audi t commen ts relate to earli er years
and n ot to the year of the Audit Report.
(vi) Audit findin gs are based exclusively on
docu ments and files. Many a ti mes,
the situati o n on th e ground is qui t,different from what is refl ected in C.e
pa pers. There is prac ti ca lly no physica l ve rification to supplement o r vali ·
date the audit findings.
(vii) There is a feeling tJlat extern al audit
reports tend to be un duly negative and
their focus is on irregula riti es and faultfinding. Audit does not always recognize
th e practical con stra in ts under which
the Gm'ernm en t/ Gove rnment Agen cies
fun ction.
(a) Audit often does n ot d iscriminate
b et wee n errors ari s in g o ut of
bo n a fid e in te nti o n s/ m a la fid e
intenti ons.
(b) Governm en t Age ncies are handica pped by unkn own/u nfo reseen
probl em s, delays b eyond th e ir
control and un ex pected h urdl es.
The aud itors, on th e other h and,
have th e be ne fit of hinds ight.
Audit as such could act as a dampn er aga ins.t new in itiatives and
ri sk ta king.
(viii) Audit Reports a re not always prese nted
in a suffi cientl y constru ctive manner,
as th ey often do not delve into the

Comptroller and Audnor General of India

causes . of the problems and how to
address them.
a) Reporting each year a large number
of problems which are already
known and which are not being
addressed does not add value.
Audit must therefore identify sys·
ternic problems.
(b) Findings 3re at times not focused
and are in the nature of scattered
observations. A macro-level view
of ·the functioning of a depart~ ment is seldom available.
"
\ "
,
, ,
(e) - Audit does not give due credit for
good performance.
(ix) The relationship between the auditor
and auditee is not always harmoniA
ous. Generally. interaction is confined
mainly to the lower levels.
(a) Audit is viewed as a system for policing Government Organisations. The
view that audit is a valuable aid to
management is nonnally missing.
(b) There is poor/inadequate response
to external audit bordering some·
times on indifference on the part

e

1

~I

449

of Government officials, which
seriously reduces the effectiveness
of audit.
(x) Th~ugh Audit Committees comprising representatives of audit and government agencies have been set up
to review the departmental action
taken on inspection reports/ recommendations, their functioning is not
satisfactory.
(xi) There is a lack of informed media
coverage of CAG's reports on Union/
State Governments. The extent of the
public interface between the auditors
and civil sOciety is poor. Inspection
reports are not in the public domain.
(xii) There is inadequate synergy/ coordina·
tion between external audit and internal audit. "
(xiii) Externa l audit does not provide
audit assurance on the fair presentation of financial statements of the
Government in accordance with stated
accounting principles and policies.
(xiv) There is rarely any audit of grants and
loans to NGOs.

j

,

Table 52.1 Articles Related to Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at a Glance

I'
,I

,

1\ ,

148.

Comptroller and Auditor-General of India

149.

Dutie. end powers of the COmptroller end AudItor-Generel

150.

Form of accounts of the Union and of the States

15'.

Audit reports

•v

"

.-.. Scan the QR code to acCess the conceptual video on Discussion of
CAG, AGI, CBI and NIA • their autonomy and limitations and other
tr
important topics on EDGE
•

\

..

-

CHAPliER

53

T

he Co nstit ution (A rticle 76) has provided for the office of the Atto rn ey
Gene ra l for Ind ia l . He/ she is the hi ghest law offi ce r in the co un try_

t APPOINTMENT AND TERM
The Atto rn ey Ge neral (AG) is appoi n ted by
th e Pres ident. He/ she mu st be a person, who
is q ualified to be appo i nted as a judge of the
Supre m e Co urt. In other words, he/ she mu st
be a citizen of Ind ia and mu st ha ve bee n a
j udge of so me hi gh co urt for five years or a n
advocate of some hi gh co urt fo r tc n years
or an e m ine nt jurist, in the opinion of the
President.
T he term of office of the AG is not fixed
by the Const itutio n . Further, th e Constitut io n
does not co n ta i n the procedure and gro un ds
for his/ he r re moval. He/ she holds office durin g th e pleasure of th e Pres ident. Th is m ea n s
that he/s he m ay be removed by the Presid e nt
at a n y tim e. He/ she m ay a lso q u it office
by submittin g resignation to the Preside nt.
Con ve n tion all y, he / sh e res ig ns wh e n the
governme n t (cou nc il of mini ste rs) resign s
or is repl aced , as he / she is appoi n ted on
its advice.
T he remuneration of the AG is n ot fixed by
th e Co nsti tution . He/ she receives suc h re nlU·
ne ratio n a s the Pres ident may dete rmine.
[Article 76 o f Chapter I (The Executive) in Part V
(Th e Union) o f the Constitu ti on deals wit h the
office of the Attorney Genera l of India.

Attorney General
of India

t DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS
As the chief law officer of t he Government of
India, the duties of the AG include the fo lJowing:
1. 1b g ive a d v"ice to t he Govern m e nt of
Ind.ia upon such legal matters, which a re
re fe rred to him / her by th e President.
2. 1b perform such oth e r duties of a lega l
c har.acte r that a re a ss ign ed to hi m / her
by t he President.
3. 1b di sc harge the fun ctions conferred on
h i m / her by the Co n sti tu ti o n OT an y
other law.
T he Presi de nt has ass ig ned th e foll owing
duties to the AG 2 :
1. Th a ppear on be halfofth e Governmen t of
In d ia in all cases in the Supre m e Co urt
in whi c h th e Government of In d ia is
co nce rn e d . .2. 'Tb represe nt the Gove rnm e n t of i n eli a in
any re fe rence m a de by t he Presiden t to
the Su preme Co urt under Artide 143 of
the Con sti tution.
3. To a pp ea r (w h e n req uired by the
Gove rnm e nt of Ind ia) in a ny high co urt
in any case in whi ch the Gove rnm ent of
[nelia is concerned.

t RIGHTS AND LIMITATIONS
In the performance of hi s/ her offic ia l duties,
the AG has the rig ht of audi e nce in a ll cou rts
in t he territory of In d ia . Fu rthe r, he/she has
2 Noti ficatio n No. F. 43·50C, 26 J an uary 1950, Gazette

of India, Extraordinary, Vo lu m e VII , pp. 33- 34.

Attorney General of India

the right to speak and to take part in the proceedings of both the Houses of Parliament or
their joint sitting and any committee of the
Parliament of which he/ she may be named a
member, but without a right to vote. He/she
also enjoys all the privileges and immunities
that are available to a member of Parliament.
In order to avoid any complication and
conflict of duty, the following limitations are
placed on the AG:
1. He/she should not advise or hold a brief
against the Government of India.
2. He/she should -not advise or hold a brief
in cases in which he/ she is called upon
to advise or appear for the Government
of India.
3. He/she should not defend accused persons
in criminal prosecutions without the permission of the Government of India.
4. He/she should not accept appointment
as a director in any company or corporation without the permission of the
Government of India.
5. He/ she should not advise any ministry or
department of Government of India or
any statutory organization or any public
sector undertaking unless the proposal
or a reference in this regard is received
Table 53.1
Article No

76.
!_~_8
;..8,-._

105.

~ 451

through the Ministry of Law and Justice,
Department of Legal Affairs2a.
However, the AG is not a full-time counsel
for the Government. He/she does not fall in the
category of government servants. Further, he/
she is not debarred from private legal practice.

t SOLICITOR GENERAL OF INDIA

In addition to the AG, there are other law officers of the Government of India. They are the
solicitor general of India and additional solicitor general of India. They assist the AG in the
fulfilment of hislher official responsibilities.
It should be noted here that only the office of
the AG is created by the Constitution. In other
words, Article 76 does not mention about the
solicitor general and additional solicitor general.
The AG is not a member of the Central
cabinet. There is a separate law minister in
the Central cabinet to look after legal matters
at the government level 3 •
2aInserted vide G.s.R. .... eE) dated 25th February, 2005.
the prime ministership of JawaharJal
Nehru, a proposal was put forward by the Central
government that the office of the Attorney General
be merged with the office of the law minister. It did
not materialise.

3 During

Articles Related to Attorney-General of India at a Glance
Subject-matter

Attorney-General of India
Rights of Attorney-General as respects the Houses of Parliament and its Committee
Powers, privileges and immunities of Attorney-General

Scan the QR code to access the conceptual video on Discussion of
CAG, AGI, CBI and NIA • their autonomy and limi ta tions and other
important topics on EDGE

CHAPliER

54

he Constitution (Article 165) has provided for the office of the advocate
genera l for the states. l He/ she is the
highest law officer in the state. Thus he/ she
corresponds to the Attorney Gen era l of India .

T

t APPOINTMENT AND TERM
The advocate general is appointed by the
govern or. He/ she must be a person who is
qu alifi ed to be appointed as a judge of a high
court. In other words, he/ sh e must be a citizen of India and must have held a judicial
office 2 for te n years or been an advocate of a
high court for ten years3.
The term of office of the advocate general
is n ot fixed by the Constitution. Further, the
Const itu tion does not co n tain the procedu re
and gro u nds fo r hi s/ h er removal. He / she
holds office during the p leasure of the governor. This means that he/ she may be removed
by th e governor at a ny time. He/ she may
also qu it h is/ her office by submi tting hi s/ h er
iArticJe J65 of Chapte r Z (The Executive) in Part VI
(The States) of the Con stitution deals with th e
office of t h e advoca te general of the state.
2Judicial office means an office within the judicial
service of the state.
3 Un like the Supreme Court, the Co nstitution makes
no provisio n fo r appoi ntment of a n eminent jur ist
as a j udge of high court.

Table 54.1

Advocate General
of the State

resignat ion to the governor. Con vent ion ally,
he/ she resigns when the govern ment (council
of ministers) resigns or is replaced, as he / she
is appo inted on its advi ce.
The remuneration of the advocate gen eral is not fixed by the Constitution. He/ she
receives such remun eratio n as th e governl)r
may determ ine.

t DUTIES AND RIGHTS
As the chieflaw office r of the governm ent i n
the state, the duties of the advocate genera l
include the fo llowing:
1. 1b give adv ice to the government of the
state upon such lega l matters which a re
referred to him / h er by the governor.
2. 1b perforln suc h other duti es of a legal
character that are assigned to him / her
by the govern or.
3. 1b disch arge the fun ctions co nferred on
h im / her by the Constitutio n or allY
other law.
.The advocate genera l has the right to sp eak
and to take part in the proceedings of both
the Houses of the state legislature or a ny com·
mi ttee of the state legislature of wh ich he/
she may be named a me mb er, but with ou t
a ri ght to vote. He/ she also e njoys all the
pri vileges and immunities that arc availab1 e
to a member of the state leg islature.

Articles Related to Advocate-General of the state at a Glance

Article No,

Subject·matter

165.

Advocate·General of the State

177.

Rights of Advocate-General as respects the Houses of State Legislature and its Committee

194.

Powers, privileges and immunities of Advocate-General

,

Advocate General of the State
Table 54.2
Article No

";::t

~ 453

Articles Related to Constitutional Bodies at a Glance
Constitutional Bodies

76.

Attorney-Genera l of India

148.

Comptroller and Auditor-General of India

165.

Advocate-General of the State

243-1.

Stme Finance Commission

243-K.

State Election Commission

243Z0.

District Planning Committee

243ZE.

Metropolitan Planning Committee

263.

Inter-State Council

279A.

Goods and Services Ta x Council

280.

Finance Commission

307.

Inter-State Trade and Commerce Commission

315.

Union Public Service Commission and State Public Service Commission

324 .

Election Commission

338.

National Commission for Scheduled Castes

338A.

National Commission for Scheduled Tribes

338B.

National Commission for Backward Classes

339.

Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes Commission

340.

Backward Classes Commission

344.

Official Language Commission and Official Language Committee of Parliament

35OB.

Special OffIcer for linguistic Minorities

J

·

CHAPTIER

55

Constitutiona I
Prescri ptions

t COMPOSITIONS
Table 55.1 Constitutional Prescription s with Respect to Compositions
SI. No.

Institutions/Bodies

Composition

Related Article

1.

Central Councilor Ministers

Prime Minister and other Ministers

74

2.

Parliament

PreSident, Rajya Sabha and lok Sabha

79

3.

Rajya Sabha

250 Members

80

4.

l ok Sabha

550 Members

81

5.

Supreme Court

Chief Justice of India and other Judges

124

6.

State Council of Ministers

Chief Minister and other Ministers

163

7.

State Legislature

Governor, Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly
or Governor and Legislative Assembly

168

8.

l egislative Assembly

Maximum SOD Members and minimum 60 Members

170

9.

Legislative Council

Maximum one-third of the total number of members
In the State Legislative Assembly and minimum 40
members

171

10 .

High Court

Chief Justice and other Judges

216

11.

Panchayats

Determined by the State Legislature

243C

12.

State Finance Commission

Determined by the State Legislature

243-1

13.

State Election Commission

State Election Commissioner

243K

14 .

MunlClpaJHles

Determined by the State Legislature

243R

15.

District Planning Committee

Determined by the State Legislature

243Z0

16 .

Metropolitan Planning
Committee

Determined by the State Legislature

24 3ZE

17.

Inter-State Council

Determined by the President

263

18 .

Goods and Services Tax
Council

Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members

279A

Constitutional Prescriptions
SI No

InstitutIOns/Bodies

CompositIOn

19.

Finance Commission

Chairman and four other Members

280

Inter-State Trade and
Commerce Commission

Determined by the Parliament

307

Union Public Service
Commission

Chairman and other Members

316

State Public Service
Commission

Chairman and other Members

316

Joint State Public Service
Commission

Chairman and other Members

316

Central Administrative
Tribunal

Determined by the Parliament

323A

25.

...., .......

State Administrative Tribunal

Determined by the Parliament

323A

26.

Tribunals for other matters

Determined by the appropriate LegiSlature (Parliament
or State Legislature)

3238

27.

Election Commission

Chief Election Commissioner and other Election
Commissioners

324

National Commission for SCs

Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members

338

29.

National Commission fot STs

Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members

338A

30.

National Commission for BCs

Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members

3388

Scheduled Areas and
Scheduled Tribes Commission

Determined by the President

339

Backward Classes
Commission

Determined by the President

340

Official Language
Commission

Chairman and other Members

344

Official Language Committee
of Parliament

Thirty Members (twenty from lok Sabha and ten from
Rajya Sabha)

344

35.

Legislative Assembly of
Nagaland

Minimum 46 members

371A

36

Legislative Assembly of
Sikklm

Minimum 30 members

371F

Legislative Assembly of
Mizoram

Minimum 40 members

371G

legislative Assembly of
Arunachal Pradesh

Minimum 30 members

371H

Legislative Assembly of Goa

Minimum 30 members

371-1

Tribes Advisory Councll

Maximum 20 members

Fifth Schedule

District Council of an
autonomous district

Maximum 30 members

Sixth Schedule

f ::

[

1 28

31.

33.

\

~ 455

I 37.
38.

Related Article

1

1

456

,r/! Indian Polity

t APPOINTMENTS
Table 55.2
51 No

1.

Constitutional Prescriptions with Respect to Appointments
Functionaries/Bodies

ApPointed by/Elected by

Electoral College consisting of the

President

Related Artlcl€

54

elected MPs and MLAs

2,

Vlee-Plesldent

3.

Electoral college eonsfstlng of the

66

Prime Minister

President

75

4-

Centrol Mlnlltels

President

75

5.

Attorney-General of India

President

76

6,

Members 0' the ~ SObha

Elected MLAs/Presldent

80

7.

Members of the Lok Sabha

Voters

81

8.

00pdIy Chairman of the RaJya SObh.

Members of the Rajya Sabha

89

9.

Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Lok
Sabha

Members of the lok Sabha

93

President

124

MPs

s of the Supreme Court
11.

Comptroller and Auditor-General of India

President

148

12,

Governor of a State

President

155

13.

Chief Minister

Governor

164

lot

$llteMlnIltels

Gowmo<

164

15.

Advocate General of a State

Governor

165

16,

Mombers of th. Stole LBgJSIotIve Assemblies

Voters

170

17.

Members of the State Legislative Councils

local Bodles/GraduatesfTeachersl
MLAsiGovernor

171

18.

~ 00«1 Deputy Speaker
J,eglslatlYe Assembly

Members of th. Stole legislative

178

0' the Stole

Assembly

19.

Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the State
Legislative Council

Members of the State Legislative
Council

182

20,

JUdges of 1he High Courts

PresIdent

217

21.

District Judges

Governor

233

22.

Ai1~ of. Union Ten1tOry

President

239

23.

Chief Minister of NCT of Deihl

President

239AA

24-

Mlnfsters of NeT of DeIhl

President

239AA

25.

Members of the Panchayats

Voters

243C

Constitutional Prescrip tions

26.

State Electlon Commissioner

Govern or

243K

27.

Members of the Municipalities

Voters

243R

Chairman and Members of the Finance
Commission

Preside nt

280

29.

Chairman and Membe rs of the UPSC

Preside nt

30.

316

Chairman and Membe rs of a SPSC

Govern or

316

3'-

Chairman and Members of a JSPSC

President

316

Chief Election Commissioner and other
Electton Commissioners

Preside nt

32.

Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members
of the National Commission for SCs

Preside nt

338

Chairperson. Vice-Chairperson and Members
of the National Commission for STs

President

338A

Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members
of the National Commission for BCs

President

3388

Schedu led Areas and Schedu led Tribes
Commission

President

339

Backward Classes Commission

President

340

Chairman and Members of the Official
Langua ge Commission

President

344

Membe rs of the Official l anguage Committee
of Parliament

Members of the lok Sabha and
Members of the RaJya Sabha

344

Special Officer fo r Linguistic Minoriti es

President

3508

Members of the District Council of an
autonomous district

Voters/Governor

Sixth Schedule

CommiSSIon on the Administration of

Govern or

SIXth Schedu le

28.

32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.

,

'tt 457

38.
39.
40.
4'42.

Autonomous Olstricts and Autonomous Regions

t AGE
Table 55.3 Consti tutional Prescriptions with Respe ct to Age
51 No

'-

Electlon l Appom tmentiR etlreme nt / Others

Prescri bed Age

Election of the President

35 years

58

-~-

Related Article

2.

Election of the Vlce-Presldenl

35 years

3.

Election of a membe r of the Rajya Sabha

66 ~

30 years

84

25 years

84

••

_.

,

Election of a member of the Lok Sabha

•

(Contd.)

458

,(7 Ind;an Polfty

51 No

s.
6.

Prescribed Age

Retirement of a Judge of the Supreme Court

65 years

'24

35yaalS

1&'1

30 years

'73

~

7.

8.

ElectIOn AppOintment Retirement Others

otthe _

of. Slate

Ejection of a member of the State Legislative
Council

of. member al'the Slate LegbIa1M!

_

Related Arttele

25_

Astembly

9.

Retirement of a Judge of the High Courts

62 years

10.

ElectIon of ...._

21 years

,t

Election of a member of the Municipalities

21 years

243V

12.

Retirement of . member of the UPSC

65_

iii.

'3.

Retirement of a member of a SPSC

62 years

3'6

t4.

_ n t o t . _ ot.JSPSC

62_

'S.

Registration as a voter in the electoral roll

18 years

of the PenCllayats

t OATHS
Table 55.4
51 N o

Constitutional Prescriptions with Respect to Oaths

FunctlonMles

O ath A dministered by (or) M ade and Subscnbed

Related A rticle

Be f o re

t

President

2.

~

3.

_mont

Before the Chief Justice of India (or) the senior most
Judge of the Supreme Court available

Union Ministers

4-

~for_101he

S.

Members of the Parliament

8.

01
_01._

9.

State Ministers

6.
7.

Judges

the Supreme Court

Comptroller and Auditor·
General of India

60

By the President

_!he

Before the President (or) some person apPointed In
that behalf by him

!hat _

_ n t (or) soma _
bV 111m

II'I"*IIIad In

Before the President (or) some person appointed In
that behalf by him

_the

.........

(01) the _

99

ChIoI_"'Ihe_.

'48

C4Iuit

mast Judge of the -MahQlllt

By the Governor of the State

'64

Constitutionol Prescriptions
SI N o

F unct iona ries

Oat h A dministere d by (or) M ade and Subscr ibed

~ 459

Related Article

Befor e

10.

173

Candidate for election to the
State legislature

Before some person authorized In that behalf by the
Election Commission

".

Members of the State
legislature

Before the Governor of the State (or) some person
appointed In that behalf by him

188

12.

Judges of the High Courts

Before the Governor of the State (or) some person
appointed In that behalf
him

219

~

t TERM
Ta ble 55.5
SI 11.0

l

Constitutional Prescriptions with Respect to Term

Functionaries/I nstitutions

Ter m/Duration

Related Article

1.

President

5 years

2.

Vice--Presldent

5 yea"

3.

Prime Minister

During the pleasure of the President

75

4.

Central Ministers

During the pleasure of the President

75

5.

Attorney-General of India

During the pleasure of the President

76

6.

Rajy8 Sabha

Continuing Chamber (one-third of ItS
members retire every second year)

83

7.

lok Sabha

5 years

83

8.

Comptroller and Auditor-General of India

Determined by the Parli,ment

148

9.

Governor

5 years (or) during the pleasure of the
President

156

10.

Ch'" MinISter

During the pleasure of the Governor

164

".

State Ministers

During the pleasure of the Governor

164

12.

Advocate-General of a Stale

During the pleasure of the Governor

165

13.

State legislative Assembly

5 years

172

14.

State legislative Council

ContInuing Chamber (one-third of Its
members retire every second year)

15.

Chief Minister of NCT of DeIhl

During the pleasure of the President

239AA

16.

Ministers of NCT of Deihl

During the pleasure of the President

239M

17.

Panchayats

5 years

18.

Stete Election Commissioner

Determined by the Governor (subject to
the law of the State legislature)

243"

19.

Municipalities

5 years

243U

56

.--

--.-

.- -

112

243E

(Contd.)

460

,(1' Indian Pality

21.

Chairman and Members of the UPSC

6 years

316

22.

Chairman and Members of the SPSC

6 years

316

23.

Chairman and Members of the JSPSC

6 years

316

24.

ChIef Election Commissioner and other
election Commissioners

Determined by the President (subject to
the law of Parliament)

25.

Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members
of the National Commission for SCs

Determined by the President (subject to
the law of Parliament)

26.

Chairperson. Vice-Chairperson and Members
of the National Commission for STs

Determined by the President (subject to
the law of Parliament)

27.

Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members
of the National Commission for BCs

Determined by the President (subject to
the law of Parliament)

28.

Elected Members of the District Council of
an autonomous district

5 years

Sixth Schedule

29.

Nominated Members of the District Council
of an autonomous district

During the pleasure of the Governor

Sixth Schedule

324
338
338A
3388

t SALARIES
Table 55.6
51. No

Constitutional Prescriptions with Respect to Salaries

Functionaries

Salary Determined by

Related Article

1.

President

Parliament

2.

Vice-President

No Salary
(Entitled to the Salary of the
Chairman of the Rejya Sabha)

3.

Prime Minister

Parliament

75

4.

Central Ministers

Parliament

7S

5.

Attorney-General of India

President

76

6.

Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Rajya
Sabha

Parliament

97

7.

Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Lok

Parliament

97

Parliament

106

59

64

Sabha

8.

Members of Parliament (Both Rajya Sabha and
lok 5abha)

9.

Judges of the Supreme Court

Parliament

125

10.

Comptroller and Auditor-General of India

Parliament

148

Constitutionol Prescriptions
SI No

~ 461

Functionaries

Sa lary Determined by

It

Governor of a State

Parliament

158

12.

Chief Minist er

State Legislature

164

13.

State Ministers

State Legislature

Advocate..Generai of a State

Governor

Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the State
Legislative Assembly

State Legislature

186

Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the State
legislative Council

State legislature

186

17.

Members of the State Legislature (Both
Assembly and Council)

Slate Legislature

195

18.

Judges of the High Courts

Parliament

221

19.

State Election Commissioner

Governor (subject to the law of the
State Legislature)

243K

20.

Chairman and Members of the UPSC

Pres/den!

318

2t

Chairman and Members of a SPSC

Governor

318

22 .

Chairman and Members of a JSPSC

President

23.

Chief Election Commissioner and other
Election Commissioners

President (subject to the law of
Parliament)

32'

24.

Chairperson. Vlce-thalrperson and Members
of the National CommisSion for SCs

President (subject to the law of
Parliament)

338 ~1

Chairperson. Vice·Chairperson and Members
of the National Commission for STs

President (subject to the law of
Parliament)

338A

Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Membecs
of the National Commission for acs

President (subject to the law of
Parliament)

3388

15.
16.

25.
26.

....',

~

-

Related Article

--

-]

164
165

-

318

t RESIGNATIONS
Table 5 5.7
51 No

Constitutional Prescriptions with Respect to Resignations

Functionaries

ReslgnatlOn Submitted to

Related Article

t

President

Vlce·President

56

2.

Vice-President

President

67

3.

Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha

Chairman of the Rajya Sabha

90

4.

Speaker of the lok Sabha

Deputy Speaker of the lok Sabha

94

5.

Deputy Speaker of the lok Sabha

Speaker of the lok Sabha

9'
(Conld.)

462

tr

Indian Polity

7.

Members of the Lok Sabha

8.

Judges of .... SUjItome Court

9.

Governor of a State

10.

SpoekorGf .... _~~

11.

Deputy Speaker of the State Legislative
Assembly

12.

Chelrmanof .... _~ CouRd

13.

Deputy Chairman of the State Legislative
Council

....

President

-..

15.

Members of the State Legislative Council

16.

JUIIOOS of .... !!Ig/I Courts

17.

Chairman and Members of the UPSC

19.

Chairman and Members of a JSPSC

President

~ REMOVALS AND DISSOLUTIONS
Table 55.8

Constitutional Prescriptions with Respect to Removals/Dissolutions

5.

Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha

Rajya Sabha

7.

Judges of the Supreme Court

President
(on the recommendation of the
Parliament)

Constitutional Prescriptions
SI No

8.

ComptroHer and Auditor -Genera l of lnet..

9.

'0.

".
'2.

Remove d by/Diss o lved by

Related Art icle

Presktent
(on the recomm endatio n of the
Paruament)

'48

State legislat ive Council

Not subject to dissolution

SIa,. legislative Assembly

172

Govern or

174

Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the State
legislat ive Assembly

State legislative Assembly

179

Chllnnan and Deputy Chairman of the State
legislat ive Council

State Legtslative Council

183

13.

Judges of the High Courts

217

...

Preside nt
(on the recomm endatio n of the
Parliament)

State Election Commis sioner

President
(on the recomm endatio n of the
Partlament)

2431<

Chairman and Members of the UPSC, a
JSPSC and a SPSC

President

317

.- Chief Electlon Commis sioner

Preside nt
(on the recomm endatio n of the
Partlament)

324

President
(on the recomm endalio n of the Chief
Election Commissioner)

324

15.

[

FunctIO naries Bodies

~ 463

16.

17.

18.

Election Commls~ioners or Regional
Commissioners

Otstrict Council of an autonom ous district and
Regional Council of an Autono mous Region

Governo.

Sixth Schedu le

(on the recommendatiOn of the
Commis sion on the Admlnls ttatlon
of Autono mous Otstrlcts and
autonom ous ,eglons )

~ SUBMISSION OF REPORTS
Table 55.9
SI N o

Constitutional Prescriptions with Respect to Submission of Report
s

Functio naries/ Bodies

Report Submit ted to

1.

Comptr oller and Auditor-General of India

Preside nt (related to the Union) and
Govern or (related to the State)

151

2.

State Finance Commis sion

Govem or

3.

243-1

Chairperson of the District Planning Committee

<.

State Govern ment

243ZD

Chairperson of the Metrop olitan P1annlng

State Govem ment

243ZE

President

280

Committee

,

5.

Finance Commission

Related Article

(Contd.,

464

,€,! Ind;an Palny

7.

5P5C

Governor

323

8.

JSPSC

Govemor

323

9.

National Commission for SCs

President

338

10.

National CommIsSIon for Sfs

Prelldent

338A

11.

National Commission for BCs

President

338B

Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes

PresIdent

339

President

340

President

344

12.

CommiSsIon

13.

Backward Classes Commission

14.
15.

Official Language Committee of Parliament

President

344

16.

Speclol 0IIIcer for U

Pr_nt

3SOB

17.

Governor

President (regarding the failure of
constitutional machinery in the State)

356

'8.

Governor

c Minorities

President (regarding 1I1e

FIftII Schedule

administration Of SCheduled Areas In
die Slate)
'9.

Commission on the Administration of
Autonomous Districts and Autonomous
Regions

Governor

Sixth Schedule

In this Part...
56. NITI Aayag
57. National Human Rights Commission
58. State Human Rights Commission
59. National Commission for Women
60. National Commission for Protection
of Child Rights
61. National Commission for Minorities
62. Central Information Commission
63. State Information Commission

64. Central Vigilance Commission
65. Central Bureau of Investigation
66.lokpal and lokayuktas
67. National Investigation Agency
68. National Disaster Management Authority
69. Bar Council of India
70. law Commission of India
71. OeUmltation Commission of India

NITI Aayog

t ESTABLISHMENT
On the 13th of August, 2014, the Modi Government scrapped the 65-year-old Planning Commission and announced that it would he replaced
by a new body. Accordingly, on January 1, 2015,
the NfTI Aayog (National Institution fOT funsfonning India) was established as the successor
to the planning commission.
However, it must be noted here that the
NITI Aayog, like that of the Planning Commission, was also created by an executive
resolution l of the Government of India (Le.,
Union Cabinet). Hence, it is also neither a
constitutional body nor a statutory body.
In other words, it is a non-constitutional or
extra-constitutional body (Le., not created by
the Constitution) and a non-statutory body
(not created by an Act of the Parliament).
lResolution of the Cabinet Secretariat vide No.
51112/ 1/2015-Cab., dated the lst of January, 2015,
published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary,
Part I, Section I , dated the 7th of January, 2015.

The NITI Aayog is the premier policy
'Think Tank' of the Government of India,
providing both directional and policy inputs.
While designing strategic and long-term poli·
des and programmes for the Government of
India, NITI Aayog also provides r elevant tech·
nical advice to the Centre and States.
The centre-to-state one-way flow of policy, that
was the hallmark of the Planning Commission
era, is now sought to be replaced by a genuine
and continuing partnership of states.
In a paradigmatic shift from the command
and control approach of the past, NITI Aayog
accommodates diverse points of view in a
collaborative, rather than confrontationist,
setting. In the spirit of federalism, NITI's own
policy thinking too is shaped by a 'bottom-up'
approach rather than a 'top-down' model.

t RATIONALE
While explaining the reason for replacing the
Planning Commission with the Nm Aayog,
the Union Government made the following

466

(! Indian Polity

observation: "Ind ia has undergone a paradigm
shift over the past six decades-politkally,
eco nomica ll y, socia lly, technologically as well
as dcmographicaUy. The role of Governm ent
in national development has seen a parallel
evolution. Keeping with these changing times,
the Government of India has decided to set up
NITI Aayog (Natio nal In stitution for Transforming India) , in place of the erstwhile Planning
Commi ssion, as a means to better serve the
needs and aspirations of the people of Jndia.,,2
The new institution will be a cata lyst to the
developmental process; nurturing an overall
enabling environment, through a holistic
approach to deve lopm e nt going beyond the
limited sphere of the Public Sector and Gove rnm e nt of India. This will be built on the
foundations oe
1. An empowered role of States as equa l
partners in nationa l development; operationa li sing the principle of Coopera tive
Federalism.
Z. A knowledge hub of internal as well as
external resources; se rving as a repository of good governance best practices,
and a Think Thnk offering domain
knowledge as we ll as strategic expertise
to all levels of government.
3. A coUaborative platfonn facilitating implementat ion ; by monitoring progress,
plugging gaps and bringing together the
various ministries at the Centre and in
States, in the joint pursuit of developmental goals.
In the same co ntext, the then Union
Finance Minister Arun Jaitley said: HThe
65-year-old Planning Commission had become
a redundant organisation. It was relevant in
a comman d economy structure, but not any
longer. India is a diversified country an d
its sta tes are in various phases of economic
development along with their own strengths
and weaknesses. In this context, a 'one·sizefits-all' approach to economic planning is
2Govemment of India document on NITI Aayog

entitled as ~ From Planning to NI TI -TransfQnning
India's Dcuc/opmcm Agc/tda~, dated February 8, 2015.
llbid.

obsolete. It ca nnot make India competitive
in today's global economy.~4
The Resolution observed: "Pe rhaps most
importantly, the institution must adhere to the
tenet that while incorporati ng positive influences from the world, no single model can
be transplanted from outside into the Indian
scenario. We need to find our OW11 strategy for
grmvth. The new institution ha s to zero in on
what wiiJ work in and for India. It will be a
Bharatiya approach to development."

t COMPOSITION
The co mposition of the NIT! Aayog is as
follows:
(a) Chairperson: The Prime Minister of India
(b) Governi ng Co un ci l: It co mprises the
Chi ef Ministers of a ll the States, Chief
Ministers of Union Territories with
Legislatures (Le., Delhi, Puducherry and
Jammu and Kashmir) and Lt. Governors
of other Union Territories.
(c) Regional Co uncil s: These are forrn ed to
address specific issues and co ntingencies irnpacti ng rnore than one state or
region. These are formed for a spec ified
tenure. These are convened by the Prime
Minister a nd comprises of the Ch ief
Ministers of States and Lt. Governors of
Union Territories in the region. These
are chaired by the Cha irperso n of the
NITI Aayog or hi s/ her norninee.
(d) Special Invitees: Experts, specia lists and
practitioners with relevant domain
knowledge as specia l invitees norninated
by the Prime Minister.
(e) Full-time Organisational Framework: It
comprises, in addition to the Prime
Minister as the Cha irperso n :
(i) Vice·Chairperson: He/ she is ap·
pointed bX the Prime Minister. He/
she enjoys the rank of a Cabinet
Minister.
(ii) Full-time Members: They e njoy the
rank of a Minister of State.
4"We wi ll use every provis ion in the Co nstitutio n to
push reforms~ , OPEN Magazine, January 9, 2015.

NlTlAoyog

(iii) Part-time Members: Maxim um of 2,
from leadin g universities, resear ch
orga ni sation s and other releva nt
institutions in a n ex-officio capacity.
Part-ti me memb ers would be on a
rotation.
(iv) Ex-Offic io Memb ers: Maxim um of
4 me mbers of the Union Coun cil
of Minis ters to be nomin ated by
the Prime Minis ter.
(v) Chief Execu tive Officer: He/ she is
apPoi nted by the Prime Minis ter
for a fixed tenure, in the rank of
Secret a ry to the Gover nmen t of
India.
(vi) Secret ariat: As deeme d n ecessa ry.

t OBJECTIVES
Th e object ives of the NITI Aayog are mentioned below:
1,_ 1b evolve a shared vision of nation al
devel opme nt priori ties, sector s and
strateg ies with the active involv ement
of States.
2. 1b foster coope rative federa lism throug h
structured suppo rt initi atives and mechanism s with the States on a contin uous
basis, recog nising tha t strong States
ma ke a strong nation .
3. 1b develo p mecha nisms to formu l ate
credib le plans at the vill age level and
aggreg ate these progre ssively at high er
levels of gover nment .
4. 1b ensur e, on areas that are sp eci fically referr ed to it, that the intere sts of
nation al securi ty are incorp orated in
econo mic strate gy and policy.
5. 1b pay special attent ion to the sectio ns
of our SOCiety that may be at risk of not
b enefit ting adequ ately from econo mic
progre ss.
6. 1b design strategic and long-t erm policy and progr amme frame works and
initia tives, and moni tor their progress and their effica cy. The lesso ns
learnt throug h monitoring and feedba ck
will be used for m a king innov ati ve

~ 467

impro vemen ts, includ ing n ecessa ry midcourse correc tions.
7_ 1b provid e advice and encou rage partnersh ips b etwee n key stakeh olders and
nation a l and intern ationa l like-m inded
think tanks, as we ll as educa tional a nd
policy resear ch in stituti ons.
8. 1b create a knowl edge, innov ation a nd
e ntrepreneur ial suppo rt system throug h
a collab orative co mmun i ty of n ationa l
and intern ationa l expe rts, practi tioner s
and other partn ers.
9. 1b offer a platfo rm for the resolu tion of
inte r-sect oral and inter- depa rtm e ntal
issues in order to accele rate th e imple m e ntatio n of the develo pment agend a.
10. 1b maint ain a State-of-th e-Art Resou rce
Ce ntre, be a re posito ry of resea rch on
good gover nance a nd best practices in
sustai nable and equita bl e develo pme nt
as wel1 as help their dissem in ation to
sta ke-hol ders.
11. 1b active ly moni to r a nd eva luate the
imple menta tion of progra mmes and initiative s, includ ing the identi ficatio n of
the neede d resources so as to streng then
the proba bility of succes s and scope of
delive ry.
12. 1b focus on techno logy upgra dation a nd
ca pacity buildi ng for the imple menta tion of progra mmes a nd initiat ives.
13. 'Ib under take othe r activi ties as may be
necessa ry in order to furthe r the execution of the nation al develo pmen t agend a,
a nd the object ives me ntioned above.

t FUNCTIONS
The NITI Aayog's e ntire gamut of activit ies is
divide d into two ma in hubs: learn India and
Knowledge and Innova tion . The two hubs are at
the core of NITJ Aayog's efficie nt functi oning .
The Team India Hub ca rries out the manda te of foster ing coope rative federa lism a nd
design ing policy and progr amme frameworks.
It provides requis ite coord inatio n and suppo rt
in NITI Aayog 's engag ement with States. The
Knowl edge and Innov atio n Hub maint a in s a

468

ff

Indian Polity

state-o f-th e-art resour ce centre , a repos itory
of resear ch on good gove rnan ce and best
practi ces, provid es advice and encou rages
partn ership s with key stakeh olders , includ ing co ll eges, unive rsiti es, think tanks and
n o n-gov e rnme nta l organ izatio ns at home
s
a nd abroa d.
The variou s functi ons performed by the NITI
Aayog ca n be divide d into four main heads:
1. Policy and progr amme frame work
2. Co-op erativ e and compe titive federa lism
3. Monit oring and evalu ation
4. Think-ta nk, Know ledge and Innov ation
Hub
The NITI Aayog is fun ctio na ll y di vided
into variou s vertic a ls/ cells, which are respon sib le for exa minin g and lookin g into sector a l
issues and priori ties for nation al develo pm ent
and econo mic growt h.
The diffe rent vertic a ls/ cell s of N JTI Aayog
provjd e the requi s ite co-ord in ation a nd su pport frame work for NIT I Aayog to ca rry out
its manda te. The li st of vertic als/ ce ll s is as
follow s 6 :
1. Admi nistra t ion and Suppo rt Units
2 . Agric ulture and Allied Sector s
3. Aspir ationa l Distri cts Progra mm e Ce ll
4. Co mmun icatio n a nd Social Media Ce ll
5. Data Mana ge ment and Ana lysis, and
Front ier Techn ologie s
6. Eco nomi cs and Fin a nce Cell
7. Educa ti on
8. Gover nance and Resea rc h
9. Gove rning Cou n cil Secre ta ri at and
Coord inatio n
] 0. Indu stry- [
I I. Indus try- II
] 2. In frastru cture-Co nn ecti vity
13. Infras tru cture- En ergy
] 4. Micro , Small and Mediu m Enter prises
15. Natura l Resou rces and Envir onmen t, and
Island Deve lopme nt
16. Proje ct Appra isa l and Mana gem e nt
Divisi on
~is inform ation has been obtai ned from the official
,"rebsite of the NITI Aayog, Govern ment oflndi a.
6Annua l Repon 2022-2 3, NITI Aayog, Govern me nt

of India, p. 7.

17. PubliC -Priva te Part ne rship
] 8. Rural Devel opmen t
19. Scie nce a nd Thchn ology
20. Socia l Justic e and Empo werm ent, a nd
Vo luntar y Action Ce ll
l Sec tor-I (Skill Devel opme nt ,
Socia
21.
Labou r a nd Emplo ymen t, and Urban
Devel opm e nt)
22 . Social Sector-II ( Health an d utntl on ,
a nd Wome n and Child Devel opme nt)
23. State Finan ces and Coo rdinat ion
24. Susta inable Devel opme nt Goals
25. Water and Land Resou rces

t GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In carryi ng out the above functi ons, t he NITI
7
Aayog is guide d by th e fo ll owing princ iples :
]. Al1tyodaya: Priori tise servi ce and upl ift
of the poor, margi nali sed and downt rodden , as en un ciated in Pandi t Dee ndaya l
Upadhyay's idea of 'Antyo daya'.
2. inclusion: Empo wcr vulne rable a nd m argina l ised sectio ns, redres sing ide nti tybased inequ alities of a ll kinds -gend er,
reg ion , religio n , caste or class.
3 . Village: Integr ate our villag es in to the
deve lo pmen t proces s, to draw on the
vitali ty and e nergy of the bedro ck of our
e thos, cultur e and susten ance.
4. Demographic dividend: Ha rness our greate st
asset, the people of India; by focuss ing on
the ir develo pment , through educa tion and
skillin g, a nd their empow enn ent, throug h
produ ctive li veliho od oppor tuniti es.
5. Peopl e's Partic ipatio n: Trans form the
deve lopme nta l proce ss into a pe opl edriven one, makin g an awake ned and
parti c ipativ e citize nry-t he dri ve r of
good gover nance .
6. Gouem ance: Nurtu re an open, transp arent,
accou ntabl e, pro-ac ti ve a nd purposeful
style of gove rnan ce, tran sition ing fo c us
from Outla y to Outpu t to Outco me.
7Gover nment of India docum ent o n NITI Aayog
entitled as "Prom Planning to NITI-"1Yatufo nning
India's I)evelopmem Agenda", da ted Februa ry S, 2015.

'NITI Aoyog

7. Sustainability: Maintain sustainabi1ity at
the co re of our planning and develop·
mental process, building on our a ncient
tradition of respect for the environment.
Therefore, the NITI Aayog is based on
{be following seven pillars of effective
governance:
(i) Pro-people agenda that fulfils the aspirations of the society as well as individuals.
(ii) Pro-active in anticipating and responding
to citizen needs.
( iii) Participative, by involvem ent of citizens.
(iv) Empowering women in all aspects.
(v) Inclusion of all groups with special atten·
tion to the SCs, SIS, OBCs and minorities.
(vi) Equality of opportunity for the youth.
(vii) nansparency through the use of technology to make government visible and
responsive.
Through its commitment to a cooperative
federalism, promotion of citizen engagement,
egalitarian access to opportunity, participative
and adaptive governance and increasing use of
technology, the NITI Aayog seeks to provide a
critical directional and strategic input into the
development process. This, along with being
the incubator of ideas for development, is the
core mission of NITI Aayog.

t COOPERATIVE FEDERALlSM8
The NITI Aayog has been constituted to actualise the important goal of cooperative federalism
and to enable good governan ce in India. On
the premise that strong states make a strong
nation, NITJ Aayog acts as the quintessential
platfonn for the Government of India by bringing States together as ''learn India ' to work
towards the national development agenda.
]n view of this, a number of steps have
been taken by NITI Aayog to foster coop·
erative federalism through structured support
in itiatives and engagement with the States!
on a continuous basis. These include:
1. Meetings between the Prime Minister!
Cabinet Ministers and all Chief Ministers;
8.rhis infonnation has been obtained from the official
website of the Nm Aayog, Government of India.

~ 469

2. Subgroups of Chief Ministers on subjects
of national importa n ce;
3. Sh aring of best practices;
4. Policy support and capacity development
of State!UT functionaries;
5. Launching of the Aspirational Districts
Programme for development of backward districts;
6 . Theme-based extensive engagements in
various sectors;
7. Framing model laws for land leasing and
agriculture marketing reforms; and
8. Area-specific interventions for the NorthEastern and Himala yan States and
island development.
The NITI Aayog has been providing relevant
technical advice to the Ce ntre, States and UTh.
It has also established models and programmes
for the development of infrastructure a nd to
reignite and establish private-public partnership, such as th e Centre-state partnership
model Development Support Services to States
and Union Thrritories (DSSS); and the Sustain·
able Action for nansforming Human Capital
(SATH) programme,

t COMPETITIVE FEDERALISM"

The NIT I Aayog endeavours to promote competitive federalism by facilitating improved
perform an ce of States/ UTh. It e n co urages
h ealthy competition a m ong sta tes through
transparent rankings, in various sectors,
along with a hand-holding approach. Some
of the indices launch ed by NIT! Aayog a re
School Education Qua lity Index, State Hea lth
Index, Co mposite Water Management Index,
Sustainabl e Development Goals Index, India
Innovation Index and Export Competitiveness Index. The NITI Aayog also releases
delta rankings for the performance of Aspiration a l Dist ricts every m on th .
The ranking of States in various social
sectors based on quantitative objective criteria en co urages them, and even distri cts, to
improve their performance. The NITI Aayog
9Tbid.

470

P

Indian Polity

works cl ose ly with a ll sta keho ld ers, inc luding the State / UT Governments, concerned
Min istries/ Depart ments in developi ng indicator framewor ks, rev iew mec ha ni sms a nd
ca paci ty-bu ild i ng.

t

AUTONOMOUS AND ATTACHED
BODIES

Th e NITI Aayog is suppo rted by a n a utonomous body i.e., th e Natio nal Institute of Labor
Eco nomics Research and Develop men t and a n
attached offi ce i.e., the Develop ment Monitoring a nd Eval uat ion O rganisation. These a rc
ex pl ai ned below:
I. National Institute of Labour Economics
Research and Development lO Th e Natio nal
In stitu te of La b o ur Eco n o mi cs Researc h
and Deve lopment (NI LERD) was fo rm er ly
k nown as the Institute of Appl ied Ma n powe r
Resea rch ( IAM R). It is a ce n tra l a uto no mous
organ izat io n under the NITI A.ayog. Its p rimary objectives are research, data co l1 ection, ed ucat ion a nd tra in ing in all aspects
of h uma n ca p ita l pla nni ng, hu ma n reso urce
develop men t, and moni toring and eva lu at ion.
The lAMR was established in 1962 u nder
the Socie ties Reg istratio n Act of 1860 as an
in stitution th at wo ul d fu nction as a cl earin ghouse of ideas and unde rtake po li cy resea rch
on h uma n ca pi ta l deve lopment to inform
perspect ive p la nnin g a nd pro mote po licy
in tegrat ion.
The IAMR has been rena med as NILERD
in 2014. The NILERD is ma in ly fun ded by
gra n ts-in-aid from the N IT! Aayog (formerly
Plan n ing Co m m ission), a nd su pple me n ted
by its own reve n ue from co ntracted resea rch
projects, and edu ca ti on fi nd tra ini ng activ ities.
The In stitute moved to its own ca mp us a t
Nare la in 2002. Na re la is a develop ing urba n
and inst itutiona l hub declared as a spec ia l
eco nomic zo ne for knowlcdge in the Na ti o na l
Capital Regio n.
ID-rhi s informatio n has bee n obta ined rrom the
officia l website or the National Insti tutc of Labour
Economics Research and Deve lopment.

2. Development Monitoring and Evaluation
Office l1 : The need for an efficient and independent eva luation mechan ism in India was
recognized by the pla nners and policy-makers
right from the introduction of planning process
in the cou ntry and resulta ntly, the Programme
Eva luation Organization was esta blished by
th e Gove rnm e nt in 1952 to ca rry o ut indepe nden t and objective impact eva luatio n of
the Cen tral Gove rnm ent fun ded program mes.
In an effort to accord more functional autonomy to th e progra mm e eva lu a ti on mecha nism
in the cou n try, the Governm ent established the
Indepe nde n t Eva luat ion Office in 201 0.
T h e Deve lo pm e n t Mo ni tori ng a n d Evaluat ion Office (OM EO) was establ ished by
the Gove rnm e nt in 2015 as an attached office
of the NITI Aayog by merg ing the erstwhi le
Programm e Eva lu ation Orga ni zation a nd the
Independent Eva luation Office.
As the apex mon ito ri ng and eva luat io n
office in the cou n try, the DMEO supports the
Govern ment to achi eve the nat io nal developm en t age nda through mo ni tori ng and evaluat io n of govern m en t poli cies a nd p rogra ms.
Since its incept ion in 201 5, th e offi ce a ims to
support rigoro us, data-driven, ci tizen-ce ntric,
and ou tco mes-dr iven progra m ma nageme n t
an d poli cy mak in g.
The OMEO's mandate involves:
(i) Mo ni to ri ng progress a nd efficacy of
stra teg iC a nd long-term po li cy a nd
p rogram framewor ks an d in iti at ives
to he l p in novat ive improvements,
includ in g necessary mid-course correct io ns; a nd
(ii) Active ly mo n itori ng a nd eva luati ng
the imp leme n tat ion of progra m s a n d
in itiat ives, in cl udi ng the ident ificat io n of the needed resources so as to
stre ngt hen the probabil ity of success
a nd sco pe of de livery.
The DMEO's ma ndate also expa nds to techni cal adviso ry to States, u nder NIT I Aayog's
ma n date of cooperative and competitive
llThis infor matio n has bee n obta in ed fro m the
official website of the Development Monitoring and
Eval uation Office.

,.

,. ,.,

NITIAoyog

federa 1ism. It's institu tional positi oning gives
the organ izatio n conve nin g powe r to c reate
a p latfor m for monitoring and eva luati o n
advan cemen t in the count ry.
The Hea dqu arters of DMEO is in NITI
Aayog, New Delhi. Ti ll 2017, the DM EO h ad
15 Regional Offices known as Region al Developme nt Monit oring and Evalu ation Office s
(RDM EOs). The RDMEOs condu cted fie ld
surveys and data / inform ation collec tion work
for evalua tion studie s, and th ey also pl ayed an

impor tant role in promo ting coope rative feder-

a lism by their intera ction with the States and
UT adm inistra tions. However, keeping in view
the chang ed fun ctional requir ement s, they were
closed in 2017 and the staff were tran sferred to
DMEO Headq uarter s in New Delhi.

ERSTWHILE PLAN NING
COMMISSION
The erstwhile Plann ing Com missio n was establish ed in March 1950 by an executive resolu tion
of the Gover nment of India, (Le., the Union
Cabin et) on the recom mend ation of the Advisory Plann ing Board consti tuted in 1946, under
t he chairm a nship of K. C. Neogi. Thus, the
erstwh ile Plann ing Comm i ssion \'I3S neithe r
a con stituti onal body nor a statuto ry body. In
fndi a, it was the supre me organ of plann ing for
socia l and econo mic develo pme nt.

I
,

Funct ion s The functi ons of the e rstwh ile
Plann ing Co mmi ssion includ ed the following:
1 . 1b make an assess ment of mater ial, ca pital and huma n resour ces of the cou ntry,
and in vestig ate the possib iliti es of augm enting them.
2. 'Ib formu late a plan for the most effective
and ba lanced utilisa tion of the count ry 's
resour ces.
3. 1b determ in e priori ties and to defi ne the
stages in which the plan shou ld be ca rried out.
4 . 1b indica te the factor s that reta rd economic develo pm ent.
5 . 1b determ ine the nature of the machi nery
requir ed for succe ssful imple me n tatio n
of the plan in each stage.

~ 471

6. 1b apprai se, from time to time, the progress
achiev ed in execut io n of the plan a nd to
recom me nd n ecessa ry adjust ments.
7 . 1b make appro priate recom menda tions
for facilit ating the discha rge of its duties ,
or on a m atter referre d to it for advice by
Centra l or state gover nments.
It should be noted that the erstwhile Planning Comm ission was only a staff agenc y- an
adviso ry body and had no execut ive respon sibility. It was not respon sible for taking and
imple menti ng decisi ons. This respo nsibil ity
rested with the Centra l and State Gover nment s.
The fol1owing points ca n be
Doted in contex t of the compo sition (merr.bership) of the erstwh i1e Plann ing Comm ission :
1. The Prime Minis ter of India was the cha irman of the comm ission . He/sh e presid ed
over the meeti ngs of the comm ission .
2. The co mmi ss ion had a deput y chairm an.
He / sh e was th e de facto execu ti ve head
(i.e., full -tim e functi onal h ead) of th e
com missio n .
3 . Some Centra l Minis ters were apPOi nted as
part-t ime memb ers of th e comm i ssion.
4. Th e comm ission ha d four to seven fulltime exper t memb e rs.
5 . The comm ission had a memb er-sec retary.
The sta te gover nm e nts were not re presented in the co mmis sion in any way. Thus,
the e rstwh il e Pla nning Co mmi ss ion was
wholl y a Centre-cons tituted body.
Comp~si ti on

Cri t ical Evalu ation The erstwh i le Plann ing
Co mmis sion was origin ally establ ished as a
staff agency with adviso ry role but in the course
of time it had e merged as a powerful and directive autho rity where by its recom me ndatio n s
were considered both by the Union and states.
The critics had described it as a 'Super Cabin et',
an 'Econ omic Cabin et' , a 'Parall el Cabin et', the
' Fifth Wheel of the Coach ' and so on.
The follow ing observ ations were m ade on
the domin ee ring role played by the erstw hile
Plann ing Co mmi ss ion.
1. First Admin istrati ve Refon ns Comm ission
(ARC ) of India : The ARC observ ed:
'Unde r the Co nstitu tion, th e mini ste rs,

I

I'

•
472 (! Indian Polity
whether in the Ce ntre or the states, are in
effect, the ultim ate executive au thorities.
Unfortunately, th e Plan ning Co mmission
has, in some measures, earned the reputation of be in g a Parallel Cabin et and
som etimes, a Super Ca binet,.n
2. K. Santhana m : This eminent consti tutiona l expert stated that, 'P la nning ha s
superseded the fed eration a nd our co untry is funct io ning like a uni ta ry system
.
13
In ma ny respects'.
3. r.v. Rajalllannar: This Ch a irma n o f the
Fourth Finance Commissio n observed
that there was a n overl a pping of fu n ction s and respon sibiliti es between the
erstwhile Planning Co mmi ss ion and
Finan ce Commission in federal fiscal

transfers. 1<1

TNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
l COUNCIL
On the 1st of J a nuary, 2016, it was reported ' S
that the Mod i govern ment is a lso going to
abolish the Nat io na l Development Counci l
(NDC) and tra n sfe r its powers to t he Govern·
ing Counci l of the NITI Aayog. However, till
now such a resolution has not been passed.
It mu st also be noted he re th a t th e last
meeting (57th ) of the NDC was held o n the
27th of December, 2012 to approve the 12th
Plan (201 2-2017).
The NDC was established in August ]952 by
a n executive resolution of the Government of
India on the reco mmendation of the First Five
121nterim Report on the Machinery for Planni ng,
1967, Para 15.
ilK. Santhanam, Union-State Rela tions in India,
Asia Publishing House, 1960, p. 70.
14Report of the Fourth Finance Com m ission , New
Delhi, Government or India, 1965, pp. 88-90.

ISO/NDC to be scra pped, NITI Aayog counc il
like ly to get its powersn , The Hindu , da ted
Ja nuary 1, 2016.

Year Pla n (draft outline). Like th e erst\vhilc
Planning Com mission, it is neither a constitutio na l body nor a statutory body.
Compositi on The NDC is com posed of the
followin g members.
1. The Prime Minister of Indi a (as its
chai rm an / h ea d).
2. All Un ion Cabin et Ministers (since 1967).
3. The Chi ef Ministers of all the states.
4 . The Chief Ministers/ admini strators of all
union territories.
5 . Members of the Planning Com m ission
( now NIT I A.yog).
Objectives The NDC was established with the
fo ll owing objectives.
1. 'Ib secure coopera ti on of states in the
execution of the Plan.
2. 1b strengthen and mobilise the efforts and
resources of the na tion in support of th e
Plan.
3. 1b promote common econom ic policies
in a ll vita l sphe res.
4 . 1b ensure ba lanced a nd rap id development of a ll parts of the co untry.
Functions 1b realise the above objectives, the
NDC is assigned with the fo llowing fun ctions:
1. 1b prescribe guidelines for preparation of
the national Plan.
2. 1b co nside r the national Plan as prepared
by t he Plan ning Co mmi ss ion ( now NITI
Aayog).
3 . Th make an assessment of the resources
required for impleme nting the Plan and
to suggest measures for a ugme nting them.
4. 1b co nsider impo rtant questions of soc ial
and economic pol icy affecting nationa l
development.
5. 1b review the working of the n ational
Pla n from tim e to time.
6. Th recommend measures for achievement
of the aims and targets set out in the
na tio na l Plan.

I

I)

I

CHAPTER

'57

~ ESTABLISHMENT
The Natio nal Huma n Rights Comm ission is
a statut ory (and not a const itutio nal) body.
It was establ ished in 1993 under a legisl ation
enact ed by the Parlia ment, name ly. the Protectio n of Huma n Rights Act, 1993.
The comm ission is the watch dog of huma n
rights in the countr y, that is, the rights relating to life, liberty , equali ty and dignit y of the
indivi dual guara nteed by the Const itutio n or
embod ied in the intern ationa l coven ants) and
enforc eable by courts in India.
The specif ic objectives of the establ ishme nt

of the commission are 2;

(a) 'Ib streng then the institu tional arrang ements throug h which huma n rights issues
could be addres sed in their entire ty in a
more focussed mann er;
(b) 1b look into allega tions of excess es,
indep enden tly of the gover nmen t, in
a mann er that would under lin e the
gover nmen t's comm itmen t to protec t
huma n rights ; and
l'Intem ationa l covena nts' means the Interna tional
cOven ant on Civil and Political Rights and the
Inlema tional Coven ant on Economic, Social and
Cultur al Rights adopte d by the General Assembly
of the United Nation s on Decem ber 16, 1966 and
such other Coven ant or Conve ntion adopte d by
the General Assembly of the UN as the Centra l
Govern ment may specify. The Indian govern ment
acceded to these tv.ro Intern ationa l Covenants on
AprillO , 1979.
~K. Thomm en, 'Huma n Rights Commission', Cochin
University law Review, Vol. XVIJ, n os. 1 and 2, MarchJune 1993, pp. 67-68.

National Hu ma n
Rights Commission

(e) 1b comp lemen t and streng then the efforts
that have alread y been made in this
direct ion.

~ COM POSI TION
The co mmis sion is a multi -mem ber body
consis ting of a chairp erson and five memb ers.
The chairp erson shoul d be a ret ired chief
justice of India or a judge of the Supre me
Court and memb ers shoul d be a servin g or
retire d judge of the Supre me Court , a serving or retire d chief justic e of a high court
and three perso ns (out of which atleast one
shoul d be a woma n) havin g knowl edge or
practi cal exper ience with respec t to huma n
rights . In additi on to these full-ti me members, the comm ission also has seven ex-officio
memb ers-th e chairp erson s of the Natio nal
Comm ission for Mino rities, the Natio nal
Comm ission for SCs, the Natio nal Comm ission for S1's, the Natio nal Comm ission for
Wome n, the Natio nal Comm ission for BCs
and the Natio nal Comm issio n for Protec tion
of Child Rights and the Chief Comm ission er
for Perso ns with Disab ilities.
The chair perso n and mem bers are
appoi nted by th e Presid ent on the recom mend ation s of a six-m embe r comm ittee
consis ting of the prime minis ter as its head,
the Speak er of the Lok Sabha , the Deput y
Chair man of the Rajya Sabha , leader s of the
Oppo sition in both the House s of Parlia ment
and the Centr al home minis ter. Furth er, a sitting judge of the Supre me Court or a sitting
chief justic e of a high court can be appoi nted

474 ,~ Indian Polity
o nl y a fte r con sul tation with th e chi ef justi ce
of India.
The chai rperso n and me mbe rs hold offi ce
for a term of three years or until they attain
t he age of 70 years, whic heve r is ea rli e r. They
are e ligib le for fe-appointm e nt. After their
te nure, the c ha irperso n and me mbe rs are not
e ligib le for furth e r e mpl oy me nt unde r the
Ce ntral or a state governme nt.
The Pres ide nt ca n remO\'c the cha irperson
or any m e mbe r fro m th e office und e r t he fo llowin g circ u msta nces:
(a) If hel she is adjudged in so lve nt; or
(b) [fh e/ she engages, during hi s/ h er term of
office, in any paid e mp loy me nt outside
the duti es of his/ her office; or
(e) If he/ she is unfit to continue in offi ce by
reason of the infirm ity of mind or body;
or

(d) Ifhe/ she is of un so und mind and stands
so declared by a competent court; or
(c) If he/ she is co nvicted a nd se nte nced to
impri so nm e nt for an offence.
In addition to these, th e Pres id e nt ca n al so
remove th e c ha irperson or a ny member on
t he ground of proved mi sbe hav iour or in ca·
pac ity. Howeve r, in these cases, the President
ha s to refer th e matte r to the Supre me Court
for an inquiry. If the Supre me Court, a fte r
th e inquiry, upholds the ca use of re moval and
advises so, t he n the Preside nt ca n remove the
cha irperso n or a me mber.
Th e sa la r ies, a ll owa nces a nd othe r co n·
dition s of se rvi ce of the ch airperson or a
mem ber are determined by th e Ce ntral gove rnm e nt. But, t hey ca nnot be varied to hi s/
he r di sadva ntage after his/ her appoi ntm ent.
All the above p rovisions are a imed at secur·
ing autonomy, inde pe nde nce and imparti al.
ity in the fun ctioning of th e Commission.

~ FUNCTIONS
T he functions of the Commission are:
(3) 1b inquire into a ny violati on of hum a n
righ ts or n egli gence in the preventio n
of suc h violation by a pub l ic serva n t,
eith er suo motu or on a petition pre·
sen ted to it or on an o rde r of a court.

(b) 1b interve ne in any proceeding in vo lvin g
a ll egation of violation o f human righ ts
pe ndin g before a court.
(c) 1b visit ja ils and dete ntion places to study
the li vi ng con dition s o f inmates a nd
make recommendations thereon.
(d) 1b rev ie w t he co n stitutio na l and other
lega l safeg ua rds for the protect ion of
human rights and reco mm e nd mea sures
fo r t hei r effective impl e mentation .
(e) 1b rev iew t he fac tors including acts of
terrorism t hat inhib it th e e njoym e nt of
human ri ghts a nd reco mm e nd re media l
measures.
(f) 1b study trea ti es and oth er inte rnatio na l
instrum e nts o n huma n rights an d make
re co mm e nd at ion s for their effective
i m ple me lltation .
(g) 1b undertake and promote resea rch in the
fie ld of hum a n rights.
(h) To sp rea d human ri ghts li teracy among
the people an d promote awa re ness of th e
sa feguards availabl e for the protection of
these rights.
(i) To e n co urag e t h e effort s of n on·
govern m enta l orga ni sat ions (NGOs)
working in the fie ld of human rights.
(j) 1b unde rtake such othe r fun ction s as it
may co n si der necessa ry for the prom otion of hum a n rights.
In pursuit of its pri mary goal of protect ion
and promotio n of human rights, the comm ission has bee n making co nce rted efforts at
e nhancing awareness about human rights in
the country. In this task, the commiss ion has
been rece iving full support both from civ il
society/ NGOs/ human rights activi sts and the
media. The ca mp si ttings and open hearings
organ ized by the com mission in different parts
of the coun try, to provide justice at the doorsteps of the victims of th e human rights violations have proved to be of imm e nsely useful. za
The co mplaints received by the commiss io n cove r a wide range of issues suc h as
a ll eged human ri ghts vio lat ions due to neglige nce by publi c servants in the prevention
ZaAnnua l Repon 2019-20, National Human Rights
Co mmi ssion , Government of Ind ia, p. 16.

Notional Human Rights Ulmmission

of such violat ions, allege d custod ial deaths,
tortur e, fake encou nters, poli ce highh anded ness, violat ions comm itted by securi ty forces,
cond ition s relat ing to prison s, atroci ties committed on wome n and childr en and other
v.,u ln e rable sec tion s, comm unal violen ce,
bonde d and child labou r, non-p ayme nt of
retiral benefi ts, n eglige nce by public author ities a nd atroci ties on Sched uled Caste s/
Sched uled Tribes etc. The co mmissi on also
took cogniz ance of the intima tions received
regard ing deaths in police encou nters and
police custody, judici al custod y and in the
custod y of defenc e/ param ilitary forces. The
suo motu cogniz ance of many incide nts based
on report s in print and electr onic media was
take n includ ing those cases which came to
the notice of Chairp erson, Members, Specia l
Rappo rteurs and senior office rs of the commi ssion during the ir visits to diffe rent parts
of the country.2b

~ WOR KING
The comm ission 's hea dquar te rs is in Delhi
and it can also estab li sh office s in other
places in India. It is vested with the power
to regula te its own proced ure. It has all the
power s of a civil court and its procee dings
have a judici al c harac ter. It may call for
inform ation or report from the Centra l and
state gover nment s or any other au thorit y
subor dinate theret o.
The comm ission has its own nucl eus of
invest igatin g staff for invest igatio n into complaint s of huma n rights violat ions. Besides,
it is e mpow ered to utilise the servic es of any
office r or invest igatio n agency of the Ce ntral gover nment or any state gover nment for
the purpo se. It has also establ ished effecti ve
coope ration with the NGOs with first-h and
inform ation about huma n rights violat ions.
The comm ission is not e mpow ered to
inquir e into any matte r after the expiry of
one year from the date on which the act constituti ng violat ion of huma n rights is allege d
to have been comm itted. In other words, it
2b fbid .

~ 475

can look into a matte r within one year of its
occurr ence.
The co mmiss io n may take any of the following steps during or upon the compl etion
of an inquiry:
(a) it may recom mend to the con ce rned
govern ment or autho rity to make payment of compe nsatio n or damages to the
victi m;
(b) it may recom m end to the conce rn ed
govern ment or author ity the initiat ion of
procee dings for prosec ution or any other
action agains t the guilty public serva nt;
(c) it may recom mend to the conce rned governme nt or autho rity for th e grant of
imme diate interi m relief to the victim ;
Cd) it may approa ch the Su prem e Court orthe
high court conce rned for th e necessa ry
direct ions, orders or writs.

t ROLE
From the above, it is clear that the fun ctions
of the co mmiss ion are mainl y recom menda tory in nature. It has no power to punis h the
violat ors of huma n rights, nor to award any
relief includ ing monet ary relief to the victim .
Notably, its recom menda tions are not bindin g
on the conce rned gover nment or author ity.
But, it should be inform ed about the action
taken on its reco mmen dation s within one
month . In this contex t, a forme r memb er of
the Comm ission observ ed 3: 'The gover nment
ca nnot wa sh away the recom mend ations
made by the Comm iss ion. The comm ission 's
role may be recom menda tory, adviso ry, yet
the Gove rnme nt consid ers the ca ses forwarde d by it. It is, theref ore, impro per to say
that the comm ission is power less. It enjoys
great ma teria l a uthori ty and· no gover nment
can ignore its reco mmen dation '.
Moreove r, the co mmiss ion ha s a limited
rol e, powe rs and jurisd iction with respec t to
the violat ion of huma n rights by the memb ers
3Justic e V.S. Malim ath, 'Role or Human Rights
Comm issio n', Human Rights in India : Proble ms
a nd Perspec tives, B. P. Singh Sehgal (ed.), Deep
Publica tions, 1995, pp. 17- 20.

4 76 ,~ Indian Polity
of the arm ed forces". In this sphe re, the commission may seek a re po rt from the Central
government and make its reco mmendation s.
The Central gove rnm ent should inform the
Com mi ssion of the actio n taken on the recommendations within three months.
The commi ssio n submits its annual or
sp ecia l reports to th e Centra l government
and to the state government concerned. These
reports are laid b efore the respective legislatures, along with a memorandum of action
taken on the recommendations of the commiss ion and th e reaso ns for non -acceptan ce
of any of such recom mendations.

~ PROBLEMS
The com miss ion itself identifi ed the various
probl ems faced by it in its effective functioning and exp lained them in the fo llowi ng wal:
1. Administrative Constraints: The commission is compliant with Paris Prin ciples
which states that -the National Human
Rights In stituti o ns sha l1 have a n infrastructure which is suited fo r the smooth
condu ct of its activities, in particular
adequate funding a nd staff. The purpose
of thi s funding should be to enabl e it to
have its own staff and premises, in order
to be inde pendent of the Govem ment
and not to be subject to finan cial control which migh t affect its ind ependence from the perspective of human
ri ghts~.

The role of the co mmission is expanding day by day a nd it is handli ng more
or less one la kh comp laints every yea r
reflecting the grow ing trust reposed by
the citizen s of India. This necess itates
devolutio n of powers to the Chairperson
4Under the Protection or Hu ma n Rights Act ( 1993),
th e 'a rmed rorces' mea ns the naval, military and
air rorces and includes any other armed forces of
the Un ion .
5Annual Report 2019-20, Nationa l Human Rights
Commission, Government ofIndia, pp. 233- 234.

of th e co mmission in administrative as
well as fina ncial matters.
2. Financial Constraints: The commi ssion
rece ives grants-in-aid every year from
the Govern ment of India, Ministry of
Home Affairs. It may spend such su ms
as it thin ks fit for p erforming its function s and such sums shall be treated as
expenditure paya ble out of these grants.
With this financial independe nce, th e
co mm issio n fun ction s efficiently to
fu lfi l its mandate. However, the com mission wishes to have financia l autonomy
to purchase vehicl es as the sam e has not
been delegated.
3 . Manpower Co nstraints: Since its inception, the commi ss ion has never had the
full sa ncti oned strength as compared to
the availab le strength. As a result, due to
voluminous co mplaints, it is compelled
to engage ret ired Government officers as
co nsultants on a co ntract basis.
The co mmissio n struggles to cope up with
the expectati o ns of the victims of human
rights violations througho ut the country and
is un able to fulfil its mandate of pTOtecting
and promot ing hum an right s. It requ ires
crea tion of vario us posts for effecti vely and
efficientl y di schargi ng its mandate. Shortage
of experienced investigating officers who are
required to be provided by the Government,
affected to som e exte nt condu ct ing spot
enquiries on custodial deaths, torture, ilJegal
detentions etc. for which sufficient number
of experienced staff are required.
The Law Division, which is the backbone of
the co mmissio n , also fa ces a lot of problems
in perform ing its pi vota l role in handling/
disposing of a large number of co mplain ts
du e to shortage of manpower.
In 2017, the Supreme Court expressed its
co nce rn over the sho rtage of manpower in
the commi ssion and directed the Government
of I ndia to take note of the concerns of the
co mmiss ion and remedy them at the earliest
with a positive outlook.

·

CHAPTER '

58

State Human Rights
Commission

"

~ ESTABLISHMENT

~ COMPOSITION

The Protection of Human Rights Act of 1993
provides for the creation of not only ' the
National Human Rights Commission but also
a State Human Rights Commission at {the
state level: Accbrdingly, a State Human Rights
Commission thay be constituted by the state

The State Humal'! Rights Commission IS a
multi·member body consisting .of a chair·
person and two members. The chairperson
should be a retired Chief Justice or a Judge
of a High Court and m embers should be a
serving or retired judge of a High Court or a
District Judge in the state with a minimum
of seven years experience as District Judge
and a person having knowledge or practical
experience with respect to human rights.
The chairperson and members are appointed by the Governor on the recommenda·
tions of a committee consisting of the chief
minister as its head, the speaker of the Legis-lative Assembly, the state home. minister and
the leader of the opposition in the Legislative
Assembly. In the case of a state having Ugisla.
tive Council, the chairman of the Council and
the leader of the opposition in the Council
would also be the members of the committee.
Further, a sitting judge of a High Court or a
Sitting District Judge can be appointed only
after consultation with the Chief Justice of the
High Court of the concerned state.
The chairperson and memben hold office
for a term of three years or until they attain
the age of 70 years, whiche~er is earlier. They
are elligible for re·appointment. After their
tenure, the chairperson and members are not
eligible for further employment under a state
government or the Central government.
Although the chairperson and members
of a State Human Rights Commission are
appOinted by the ,g overnor, th ey can b e
removed only by the Pres!dent (and not by

governmentl ,

A State Human Rights Commission can
inquire into violation of hu~~h' rights only
in respect of subjects mentioned in the State
List (List-II) and the Concurrent List (List-III)
of the Seventh
Schedule of the Constitution.
,
However, ift any such case.is already being
inquired into by the National Human Rights
Commission or any other Statutory Commission, then the State Human Rights Commission does n ot. inquire into that case.
The central government may confer upon
the State Huban Rights Commissions, the
functions relating to human rights in the
union territories, except the union Jammu
and Kashmir2, and Ladakh3. The functions
relating to , human ,r ights in case of union
territories of Delhi, are to be dealt with by
the National Human Rights Commission.

,

.IThe Headquarters of the State Human rughts
Commission shall be at such place as the state
govem,tpent may, by notification, specify.
2Vide the J~mmu and Kashmir Reorganisation
(Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020.
3Vide the Union Thrritory of Ladakh Reorganisation
(Adaptation of Central Laws) Order,
2020.
,

'.

478

P

Indian Polity

th e governor). The President can remove
them 011 the sa me grounds and in the same
ma nn er as he / she ca n remove the c hairpe rso n or a member of the National Human
Rights Commission. Thus, he/ she ca n remove
the chairperson or a member under the following circumstances:
(a) If he/ she is adjudged an in solvent; or
(b) Ifhel she engages, during his/ h er term of
office, in any paid employment outside
the duties of hi s/ her office; or
(e) If he/ she is unfit to co ntinue in office by
reason of infirmity of mind or body; or
(d) Ifhe/ shc is of unsound mind and sta nds
so declared by a competent co urt; or
(e) If he/ she is co nvicted a nd se nten ced to
impri sonm e nt for an offence.
In addition to these, the President can also
remove the chairperson or a member on the
ground of proved mi sbehaviou r or in cilpa city.
However, in these cases, the Presid ent ha s to
refer the matter to the Supreme Court for
illl inquiry. If the Supreme Court, after the
inquiry, uphold s the cause of removal and
advises so, then the Preside n t can remove the
chilirperson or a member.
The sa laries, allowances and other condition s of se rvice of the chairperson or a
member are determined by the state government. But, they cannot be varied to his/ her
di sadvantage after hi s/ her appointment.
All the above provisions are aimed at securing autonomy, independence and impartiality in the functioning of the Commission.

t FUNCTIONS
The functions of the Commission are:
(a) 1b inquire into any violation of human
rights or negligence in the prevention
of such violation by a public servant,
either suo motl( or on a petition presented to it or on an order of a co urt.
(b) 1b intervene in any proe<:eding involving
allegation of violation of human rights
pending before a court.
(e) 1b visit jails and detelltion places to
study the Jiving conditions of inmates
and make recommendation thereon.

(d) To review the constitutional a nd other
legal safeg uards for the protectio n of
human rights and recommend measures
for their effective implemen tation.
(e) To review the factors including acts of
terrorism that inhibit the enj oyment of
human rights a nd recommend remedial
measures.
(f) 1b undertake and promote research in the
field of human rights.
(g) To sp read human rights literacy among
the people and promote awareness of the
sa feguards available for the protection of
t hese rights.
(h) To encourage the efforts of non-gove rnmental organizations (NGOs) working
in the field of human rights.
(i) 'Ib undertake such other functions as it
may consider necessary for the promotion of human rights.

~ WORKING
The Co mmi ss ion is vested with the power
to regulate its own procedure. It has all the
powers of a civil court and its proce edings
have a judicial character. It may call for information or report from the state governmen t
or any other authority subordinate thereto.
The Commission is not empowe red to
inquire into any matter after the expiry of
one yea r from the date on which the act constituting violation of human rights is aUeged
to have been committed. In other words, it
can look into a matter within one year of its
occurrence.
The Commission may take any of the following steps during or upon the completion
of an inquiry:
(a) It may recommend to the state government or authority to make payment of
compensation or damages to the victim;
(b) It may recommend to the state government or authority the initiation of proceedings for prosecution or any other
action against the gUilty public servant;
(e) It may recommend to the state government or authority for the grant ofimme·
diate interim relief to the victim;

State Human Rights

(d) It may approach the Supreme Court or
the state high court for the necessary
directions, orders or writs. ;
From the above points, it is clear that the,
functions of the commission are mainly recommen4atory in nature. It has no power to
punish the violators of human rights, nor to
award any relief including monetary relief
to the victim. Notably, its recommendations
are not binding on the state government or
authority. But, it should be informed about the
action taken on its recommendations within

one ,month.

>

The Commission submits its annual or
special reports to the state government. These
reports are laid before the state legislature,
along with a memorandum of action taken
on the recommendations of the Commission
and the reasons for non·acceptance of any of
such recommendations 4 •

t HUMAN RIGHTS COURTS
I

The Protection of Human Rights Act (1993)
also provides for the establishment of Human
Rights Court in every district for the speedy
trial of violation of human rights.
These courts can be set up by the state
government only with the concurrence of the
Chief Justice of the High Court of that state.
For every Human Rights Court, the state
government specifies a public prosecutor or
appoints an advocate (who has practiced for
seven years) as a special public prosecutor for
the purpose of conducting cases in that court.

t 2019 AMENDMENT ACT
The various provisions or features of the Pro·
tection of Human Rights (Amendment) Act,
2019, are as follows:
1. It provided that a person who has
been a .judge of the Supreme Court is
also made eligible to be appointed as
Chairperson of the National Human
4

Sefore each House of State Legislature where it
consists of two Houses, or where such Lagislature
consists of one House, before that House.

Camm;ss;o~ ~ 479

Rights Commission (in addition to the
person who has been the Chief Justice
of India):
2. It increased the number of members of
the National Human Rights Commission
(who are to be appointed from amongst
persons having knowledge or practical
experience with respect to human rights)
from two to three out of which at least
one has to be a woman.
3. It made the chairpersons of the National
Commission for BCs and the National
Commission for Protection of Child
Rights as well as the Chief Commissioner
for Persons with Disabilities as the ex·
officio members of the National Human
Rights Commission.
4. It reduced the term of the chairperson
and members of the National Human
Rights Commission as well as the State
Human Rights Commission from five to
three years. It also made them eligible
for re·appointment.
5. It provided that a person who has been
a ·judge of a High Court is also made
eligible to be appointed as Chairperson
of the State Human Rights Commission
(in addition to the person who has been
the Chief Justice of a High Court).
6. It provided that the central government
may confer upon the State Human
Rights Commissions, the functions relat·
ing to human rights in the union territo·
ries, except the union territory of Delhi.
The functions relating to human rights
in case of union territory of Delhi are
to be dealt with by the Nationa l-Hum an
Rights Commission.
7. It provided that the Secretary·General of
the National Human Rights Commission
shall exercise all administrative and
financial powers (except judicial func·
tions and the power to make regulations);
subject to control of the chairperson.
8. It provided that the Secretary of the State
Human Rigl1ts Commission shall exer·
cise all administrati,'le and financial
powers of the Commission, subject to
control of the chairperson.

CHAPTER

National Commission
for Women

~ ESTABLISHMENT
The Committee on Status of WODlen in India
(set up by the Government of Inelia), in ] 974,
recommended the constitution 'Jf a National
Commission for Women to fulfi l the surve illance functions and to facil itaU redressa l of
grievances and accelerate th e sccio-economic
development of women. Again, the successive
women-related committees, commissions and
plans including the Na tional Perspective Plan
for Women (1988) have also recommended
the constitution of such an apex body for
women. Accordingly, the Na tional Co mmi ssion for Wom en was constituted in 1992 for
protecting, promoting and s.lfeguarding the
interests and rights of women.
The Commission is an autonomous statutory (and not a constitutiollal) body. It was
established under a legislation enacted by
the Parliament, namel y th e Nationa l Co mmi ssion for Women Act, 19'JO. i The Ministry
of Women and Child De,'elopm e nt of the
Government of India is tLe nodal ministry
for the Comm ission. 2
The Commiss ion has a wid e manda te
covering almost all aspectlt of women 's development and empowerment. Its sp ecific objectives are as follows:
IThis Act cam e in to force on 31st Ja nuary. 1992.
11te Department of Woman and Child Development,
Government of India came into existen ce as a
separate Ministry in 2006 Earlier, since 1985, it
was a Department under :he Ministry of Human
Resource Development.

1. 'Ib revi ew the constitutional and legal
safeguards for women
2. To rec omm en d remedia l leg islative
m easures
3. 'Ib fac ilita te the redressal of grievances
4. 10 advi se th e government on all policy
matters affecting women

~ COMPOSITION
Th e Commission is a mu lti-member body
con sisting of a chairperson, fi ve members
a nd a member-secreta ry. The cha irperson
should be someone who is co mmitted to the
ca use of women. The five members should
be from amon gst persons of abi lity, integrity
and sta nd ing who have had experience in law
or legislation, trade unionism , managemen t
of an industry or an organisa tion committed
to increasing the employment potential of
women, women's voluntary organisa tion s
(including women activi sts), administration,
economic development, health, education or
soc ial welfa re. However, at least one m e mber
each should belong to the Scheduled Castes
an d Scheduled Tribes, respectively.
The membe r-secretary should be (i) an
expert in the fie ld of management, organisati onal structure or sociological movement,
or ( ii) an officer who is a member of a Civil
Serv ice of th e Union or an All-India Service
or holds a civil post under the Un ion.
The cha irperson, members and membersecreta ry are all nominated by the Central
Governme n t (M inistry of Women and Chi ld
Development). Their salaries, allowances and

.
.'

.

, .
other service conditions are also prescribed
by the Central Government.
The chairperson and members hold office
for three years. However, th ey3 can relinquish
their office at any time by addressing their
resignation to the Central Government.
Further, the Central Government can also
remove the chairperson or a member from

the office (before the expiry of his/ her term)
under the following circumstances:
1. If the individual becomes 'a n undischarged insolvent
2. If the individual gets convicted and sentenced to impris'o nment for an offence
which (in the opinion of the Central
Government) involves moral turpitude
3. If the individual is declared of unsound
mind by a competent court
4. If the individual refuses to act or becomes
incapable of acting
5. If the individual absents himself/ herself
from three consecutive 'meetings of the
Commission 4 _.
6. If the individual has abused one's official
position which (in the opinion of the
Central Government) renders one's continuance in the office as detrimental to
the public interest

t FUNCTIONS ·
The Commission is provided with a fourteenpoint mandate.
1. 1b investigate and examine all matters relating to the safeguards provided for women
under the Constitution and other laws
2. 1b present to the Central Government
annually and at such other times as it
may deem fit, reports upon the working
of those safeguards
3. 1b make recommendations for the effective implementation of those safeguards
lOther than the member-secretary who is a member
of a civil service of the Union or an All-India
Service or holds a civil post under the Union.
<4 Without obtaining leave of absence from the
Commission.

.
j

.

.

' Naaonal Commission (or Women

~

481

for improving the conditions of women
by the Union or any state
4. 1b review the existing proviSions of the
Constitution and other laws affecting
women and recommend amendments
to meet any inadequacies in such laws
5. Tb take up the cases of violation of the
provisions of the Constitution and other
laws relating to women with the appropriate authorities
6. 1b look into complaints and take suo moto
notice of matters relating to
(i) Deprivation of women's rights
(ii) Non-implementation of laws
enacted to provide protection
to women and also ·to achieve
the objective of equality and
development and
(iii) Non-compliance of policy decisions or instructions aimed at
mitigating hardships and ensuring welfare and providing relief to
women
7. 1b call for special studies or investigations into specific problems or situations arising out of discrimination and
atrocities against women al!d to identify
the constraints so as to recommend
strategies for their removal
8. 1b undertake promotional and educational research so as to suggest waY$
of ensuring due representation of
women in all spheres and to identify
factors responsible for impeding their
advancement, such as, lack of access to
housing and basic services, inadequate
support services and technologies for
reducing drudgery and occupational
health hazards and for increaSing their
productivity
9. 1b participate and advice on the planning
process of socio-economic development
of women
10. 1b evaluate the progress of the development of women under the Union and
any state
11. 'Ib inspect any jail, remand home,
women's institution or other place of

482 "c:1,ndian Polity
custody where women are kept as prison ers or otherwise, and take up with
the concerned autho ri ties for remf:dial
action
12 . 1b fund litigation involving issues affecting a large body of women
13. 1b make periodical reports to till; government on any matter pertain ing to
women and in particular variorls difficulties under which women toi'.
14. 1b look into any other matter referred to
it by the Central Government
The Comm iss ion presents an annual report
to the Central Government. It can alse submit
a report as and when it thinks necessary.
The Cen tral Government places all such
reports before each House of Parliament,
along with a memorandum explaining the
action ta ken on the recommendati ')I1s made
by the Commission. The m emura ndum
should also contain the reason s fOT the non acceptance of any of such recomm endations.
If any such report is related to any matter w ith which a n y State Govern m ent is
concerned, the Com mi ssion fonV3rds a copy
of such report to such State G.Jvernment.
The State Government places it. before the
state legislature, along with a memorandum explaining the action taken on the
recommendations of the com mission. The
memorandum should also contain the rea sons for the non-acceptance of a ny of such
recommendations.

t POWERS
The Commission ca n appoint the comm ittees
n ecessary for dealing with the special issues
taken up by it from tim e to time. It is also
empowered to co-opt as mem-bers of any such
co mmittee the persons from Jutside the Commission (i.e. those who are not members of the
Commission). The co-opted perso ns can attend
the meetings of the comm ittee and take part
in its proceedings but withou t the right to vote.
The Commission sha ll regu late its own
procedure and also the prccedure of its committees.

The Commissio n, while in vestigating any
matter or inquiring into any complaint, has
all the powers of a civil cou rt trying a suit
and in particular in respect of the fo llowing
matters:
1. Summoning and enforcing the attendance
of any person from any part of India
and exami ning him / her on oath
Z. Requiring th e discovery and production
of a ny document
3. Receiving ev iden ce on affidavits
4. Requ isitioning any public reco rd from
any court or office
S. Issuing summons for the examination of
witnesses and documents and
6. Any other matter which may be prescribed by the Ce ntral Government
The Central Government shou ld consult
the Comm ission on all major poli cy matters
affecting women.

t WORKING"

The Commission processes the co mplain ts
received verba ll y or in wT iting. It also takes
into account SIlO mota not ice of cases related
to women .
The compla ints received by the Co mmission relate to various categories of crim es
against women. These complaints a re registered under the fo ll owing 23 heads:
]. Rape/ attempt to rape
2 . Acid attack
3 . Sex ual assault
4. Sexual harassment
5. Stalki n g/ Voyeurism
6. Trafficking/ prostitution of women
7. Outraging modesty of women/ Molestation
8. Cyber crimes aga inst women
9. Police apathy against wome n
10. Harassment of marri ed women / dowry
harassment
11. Dowry dea th
12. Bigamy / Polygamy
13 . Protection of women against dom estic
violen ce
information is obtained from the official
w'c bsite of the National Commission for Women.

~"Th i s

National Commission (or Women

~ 483

5. For serious crimes, the Commission
14. Women's right of custody of children/
constitutes an Inquiry Committee to
Divorce
provide immediate relief and justice to
15. Right to exercise choice in marriage/ .
the victims of violence and atrocities.
Honour Crimes
16. Right to live with dignity
17. Sexual harassment of wOmen at workplace
PARIVARIK MAHILA LOK ADALAT'"
18. Denial of maternity benefits to women
The Commission has evolved an innova19. Gender discrimination including equal
tive concept of Parivarik Mahila Lok Adalat
right to education and work
(PMLA), which in turn supplements the
20. Indecent representation of women
efforts of the District Legal Service Author21. Sex Selective Abortions; Female Foeticide/
ity for redressal and speedy disposal of the
Amniocentesis
matters
related to marriage and family affairs
22. 1taditional practices derogatory to women
pending in various courts . .
rights like Sati Pratha, Devdasi Pratha
Th e Parivarik Mahila Lok Adalat functions
and Witch Hunting
on the model of the Lok Adalat. The Commis·
23. Free legal aid for women.
sion
provides financial assistance to NGOs
The complaints are acted 'upon in .the fol·
or State Women Commissions or State Legal
lowing manner:
Authority to organise the Parivarik
Service
1. Specific cases of police apathy are sent to
Mahila Lok Adalat.
the police authorities 'for investigation
The .objectives of Parivarik Mahila Lok
and cases are monitored.
Adalat are as follows:
2. Family disputes are resolved or compro·
1. 1b provide speedy and cost-free dispensamises struck through counseling.
tion of j1;1stic~ to women
3. Disaggregated data are made available
2.
1b
generate awareness ~mong tJte public
to various state authorities to facilitate
regarding conciliatory mode of dispute
adion.
settlement
4. In sexual harassment complaints, the con3.
1b
gear up the proc~ss of organising the
cerned organisations are urged to expes
Lok Adalats and to encourage the public
dite cases and the disposal is monitored.
to settle their disputes outside the formal set.;up
.
'
4 . 1b empower public especially .women
5According to the' landmark judgement of the
to participate. 1n ' ju&tice delivery
Supreme Court on Sexual Harassment at \Vorkplace
mechanism.
delivered in the Vishakavs. State of Rajasthan (1997),

t

every employer is required to provide for effective
complaints, procedures and remedies including
awarding of compensation to women victims.

saThis . information is obtained from th~ official
website of the National Commission fOT Women.

•

CHAPTER

60

National Commission
for Protection of
Child Rights

t ESTABLISHMENT
The National Commission for Protection of
Child Rights is a statutory (and not a consti·
tutional) body. It was set up in 2007 under a
legislation enacted by the Parliament, namel y
the Co mmi ssion s fOT Protection of Child
Rights Act, 2005.'
The Commission has to protect, promote and
defend child Tights in the country. Under the
Act, the 'child rights' includes the children 's
rights adopted in the United Nations Conventio n on the Rights ofthe Child on 20 November
1989 and ratified by tbe Government oflndia
on 11 Dece mber 1992. Under this Convention ,
a child ha s been defined as a human being
below the age of eighteen years.
The Commission would deal with the effective implementation oflaws and programmes
relating to children.
The objectives of the Commission are as
fo llowsz:
1. 'Ib take cognizance and redress matters
pertaining to violation of the rights of
the child.
2. 'Ib ensure that all laws, policies, programmes and administrative mec hanism s are in consonance with the
child rights perspe ctive as enshrined
in the Constitution of India as well as
the United Nation s convention on the
Rights of the Child.
The Commission is an autonomous body.
It operates under the administrative control
lThis Act came into force on 5th February, 2007.
2Annual Report 2020-21, Natio nal Commission for
Protection of Child Rights, p. 10.

of the Ministry of Women and Child Developme nt, Government of India 3.

t COMPOSITION
The Com mi ssion is a multi-member body
consisting of a Chairperson a nd six members.
Out of the six mem bers, at least two sh ould
be women.
The Chairperson shou ld be a person of
eminence who has done outstanding work
for promoting the welfare of children. The
six members should be from amongst persons
of eminence, ability, integrity, standing and
experience in the following fields:
1. Education
2. Ch ild h ea lthcare, welfare or c hild
development
3 . Juvenile justice or case of neglected or
marginalised children or children with
disabilities
4. Elimination of chi ld labour or children
in distress
5. Child psychology or sociology
6. Laws relating to children
The Chairperson and other members a re appointed by the Central Government. Hmrever,
the Chairperson is appointed on the recommendation ofa three-member selection comnlittee
constituted by the Centra l Government under
the Chairmanship of the minister-in-charge
>rhe DepartmentofWome n a nd Child Developme nt,
Government of India, came into existence as a
separate Mi nistry in 2006. Earlier, since 1985, it
was a Department under t he Ministry of Human
Resource Development.

National Commission (or Protection o(Child Rights

of the Ministry or the Department of Women
and Child Development."
The salaries, allowances and other serv ice
co ndition s of the Cha irperson and members
are also prescribed by the Central Government.
However, they cannot be va ried to their disadvantage after their appointment.
The Chairperson and members hold office
for a term of three years. They are not eligible
for apPointment for more than two terms.
Further, the upper age limit for holding the
office is as follows:
1. In the case of the Chairperson, it is
65 yea rs
2. In the case of the m e mbers, it is
60 yea rs
The Chairperso n or a member can relitlquish the office at any time by addressing the
resignation to the Central Government.
The Central Gove rnment can remove the
Chairperson from the office on the ground of
proven mi sbehaviour or in capacity. Further,
it can also remove the Chairperson or any
member from the office under any of the following circu mstances:
1. Adjudged as insolvent
2. Engages, during the term of office, in any
paid employment outside the duties of
the office
3. Refuses to act or beco m es incapable of
acting
4. Declared of unsound mind by a competent court
5. Abused the office which renders the continuance in the office as detrimental to
the public interest
6. Co nvicted a nd sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which ( in the opinion of the Central Governme nt) involves
moral turpitude
7. Absents him self/ herselffrom three consecutive meet ings of the Commission 5 .
"Before the Commissions for Protection of Child Rights
(Amendment) Act, 2006. it was the Minister-in-charge
of the Ministry of Human Resource Development.
$Without obtaining leave of absen ce from the
Com mi ss ion .

485

t FUNCTIONS
The functions of the Comm ission are as follows:
1. 1b exam ine and review the safeguards provided by the laws for the protection of
child rights and recommend measures
for their effective impl eme ntation
2. 1b prese nt to the Central Government,
annually and at such other intervals as
it may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards
3. 1b inquire into violation of child rights
and recommend initiation of proceedings in such cases
4. 1b exam in e all factors that inhibits the
enjoy ment of rights of children affected
by terrorism, co mmunal riots, natural
disaster, domestic violence, HIV / AIDS,
trafficking, exploitation and prostitution
and recommend remedial measures
5. 1b look into matters relating to children in n eed of special care including
childre n in distress, marginaJised children, children in co nflict with the law,
juveniles, children without family and
childre n of prisoners and recommend
rem ed ial measures
6. 1b study treaties and other international
instruments and undertake periodi cal
review of existing policies, programmes
and other activities on child rights and
make recommendations for their effective implementation
7. 1b undertake and promote research in the
field of child rights
8. 1b spread child rights literacy among various sections of the society and promote
aware ness of the safeguards available for
protection of these rights
9. 1b inspect any juvenile custodial home
or any other place of residence or institution (under the control of the Central
Gove rnment or any State Government
or a ny other authority, including any
institution run by a social organisation)
wh ere children .are detained or lodged for
the purpose of treat.m ent, reformation

486

fJ

Indian Polity

o r protect io n and take up with th ese
<l uthor ilies for re m ed ia l action
10. To inquire in to co mpla ints and take suo
molo not ice of matters re lating to
(i) Deprivation and violat io n of ch ild
rig hts
(ii) No n- impleme ntation of laws providi ng for protect io n a nd deve lopme n t of c hi ldre n
(iii) Non-co mplia nce of pol icy dec isio ns
o r inst ruct io ns a imed at m itigat ing
hardsh ips and en suring welfare and
providi ng re lief to chi ldren
11 . 10 perfo rm such other function s as it may
consid er necessa ry for the pro mOl io n of
child ri g hts
It m ust be noted here [hat t he Co mmi ss io n
is pro h ibited from inquiring into any ma tte r
which is pen d ing befo re a State Co mmi ssion
for Protection of Chi ld Rig hts or any other
Statuto ry Comm iss ion .

t POWERS
Th e Co m m iss ion , wh ile inq ui ring into any
lll atter }1<IS all the powe rs of <:1 c ivil co urt trying a suit a nd in part icu lar in respec t of th e
fo ll owin g matte rs:
1. Summ o ning and enforcing the attenda nce
of <Iny person a nd examin ing h im / her
on oat h
2. Req uir ing the di scove ry and production
of a ny docum e nt
3. Receiv i ng ev ide nce on affidavits
4. Requi sit io ni ng any pub lic record frol11
a ny co urt o r offi ce and
5. Issuing summon s for the exam in ation of
witnesses or d ocu ments

t WORKING

The Co mm iss io n may take any of the following steps upo n the co mp let ion of an inquiry:
1. It may recommend to the concerned
government or autho rity t he in itiation
of proc.eed ings for prosecuti on or such
other sui tab le a ct ion agai nst th e co n ~
cc rncd pe rso ll .

2. It may ap pro.1ch the Su preme Court or th e
High Co urt co nce rn ed fo r the necessary
d irect io ns, o rd e rs or writs.
3. It may reco mm e nd to the con ce rn ed
gove rnm e nt or authority fo r the grant of
necessary inte rim relief to the victim .
T he Co mm iss io n s ubmits it s annua l or
spec ial re ports to the Ce ntra l Government
a nd to th e State Government co n ce rned.
T hese re po rts .a re la id before the respect ive
legislatures, a lo ng with a memorand u m of
act io n ta ke n o n t he re co m men da t io n s of
the Co mm iss ion a nd the rea so ns fo r nOI1 accepta nce of a ny of suc h recol1l me ndat io ns
wit hi n o ne yea r.

t FUNCTIONS UNDER OTHER ACTS
I n add ition to t he a bove functions, th e com-

m iss io n has been assigned t he additional
func ti o ns Linder three Acts re lat ing to the
children. These a re as fo ll ows:
I . Th e Ri ght of Child ren to Free and Compul sory Educa t ion (RTE) Act , 2009: According
to this Act, t he Co mmiss ion has to perform
th e fo ll owing fu nct io ns:
(i) 10 exa min e a nd review the sa feguards for
ri g hts p rov ided by or u nder this Act and
reco m me nd measures fo r the ir effective
impleme nta t io n
(ii) lb inq ui re in to co m pla ints re latin g to
chi ld' s right to free and co m pu lso ry
educat io n
(iii) 1b take necessary steps after completion
of an inqu iry
Further, the Co mmiss ion shall , wh ile inquiring into <l ny matter relati ng to a ch ild's r ight to
free a nd co mpulso ry ed ucatio n , have t he sa m e
powers as assigned to it under the Comm issions
fo r the Protectio n of Child Rights Act, 2005.

2. The Protect ion of Children from the Sexual

Offence. (POCSO) Act, 2012: Th is Act makes

the foll owing prov isio ns with respect to the
add iti ona l fun ction s of the Com m ission:
(i) Th e Co mm ission shall mon itor the imp l6mentation of the provisions of th is Act in
such ma nner as In<ly be presc ribed.

)

National Commission for Protection of Child Ri hts

(ii) The Commission shall, while inquiring
into any matter relating to any offence
under this Act, have the same powers as
are vested in it under the Commissions for
the Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005.
(iii) The Commission shall also include its
activities under this Act in the annual
report referred to in the Commissions for
the Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005.

3. The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection)
Act, 2015: With regard to the additional
functions of the Commission, the following
provisions are contained in this Act:
(i) The Commission shall monitor the implementation of the provisions of this Act in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(ii) The Commission shall, while inquiring
into any matter relating to any offence
under this Act, have the same powers as
are vested in it under the Commissions for
the Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005.
(iii) The Commission shall also include its
activities under this Act in the annual
report referred to in the Commissions for
the Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005.

STATE COMMISSION FOR
PROTECTION OF CHILD RIGHTS
The Commissions for Protection of Child
Rights Act of 2005 provides for the creation
of not only the National Commission for
Protection of Child Rights but also a State
Commission for Protection of Child Rights
at the state leveL Accordingly, a state government may constitute a State Commission for
Protection of Child Rights through an Official
Gazette Notification.

Composition
The State Commission is a multi·member
body consisting of a chairperson and six
members. Out of the six members, at least
two should be women.
The chairperson should be a person of
eminence who has done outstanding work
for promoting the welfare of children. The

487

six member should be from amongst persons
of eminence, ability, integrity, standing and
experience in the following fields:
(i) education
(ii) child health, care, welfare or child
development
(iii) juvenile justice or care of neglected or
marginalized children or children with
disabilities
(iv) elimination of child labour or children
in distress
(v) child psychology or sociology and
(vi) laws relating to children.
The chairperson and other members are
appointed by the state government. However,
the chairperson is appointed on the recommen~
dation of a three~member selection committee
constituted by the state government under the
chairmanship of the Minister-in-charge of the
Department dealing with children.
The salaries, allowances and other service
conditions of the chairperson and members
are also prescribed by the state government.
However, they cannot be vafied to their disadvantage after their appointment.
The chairperson and members hold office
for a term of three years. They are not eligible
for appointment for more than two terms.
Further the upper age limit for holding the
office is as follows:
(a) in the case of the chairperson, it is 65
years; and
(b) in the case of the members, it is 60 years.
The chairperson or a member can relinquish
his/ her office at any time by addressing his/
her resignation to the state government.
The state government can remove the
chairperson from their office on the ground
of proved misbehaviour or incapacity. Further,
it can also remove the chairperson or any
member from their office under the follow~
ing circumstances:
(i) If he/she is adjudged an insolvent; or
(ii) If he/ she engages, during their term of
office, in any paid employment outside.
the duties of his/ her office; or
(iii) If he(she refll;se.s to act or becomes incapable of actipg;' or .. · ~ ~,

488

,( f Indian POlity

(iv) If he / she is decla red of unsound mind
by a co mpetent court; or
(v) If he/ she has so abu sed his/ her office
which re nd ers hi s/ h e r continu a nce in
the offi ce as detrim ental to the publi c
interest; or
(vi) If he/she is co nvicted and sente nced to
impri sonment for an offence whi ch ( in
the opin ion of the stHte government)
involves m oral t urpitude; or
(vii) If h e/she a b sents him se lf/ he rse lf
from three co n secutive meeting of th e
. .
6
com m ISSIOn .

Functions of the Commission
The functio n s of the state comm issio n are
as fo ll ows:
1. 1b exam ine a nd review the safegua rds provided by the laws for the protection of
c hild rights a nd recommend measures
for their effective implementation.
2. 1b prese nt to the state governm ent, annua lly and at such other intervals as it may
deem fit, reports upon the working of
those safegua rds.
3. 1b inquire into violatio n of chi ld rights
and recommend initiation of proceedings in such cases.
4. 'Tb exa m ine a ll factors that inhibi ts the
enj oy ment of rights of chi Idre n affected
by terrorism, comm un a l riots, natural
di saste r, domestic viol en ce, HIV / AI DS,
trafficking, exploi tation and prostitution
a nd recommend remedial measures.
5. 1b loo k into th e ma tte rs rela tin g to
ch ildren in n eed of spec ial ca re including childre n in distress, marginalized
children, childre n in co nfl ict with law,
juven iJ es, childre n without family and
children of prisoners a nd recom me nd
remed ia l measures.
6. Th study treaties a nd othe r international
instrum ents an d under take periodical
review of existing policies, programmes
6Without obt.1 in ing leave of absence from the State
Commission ,

and other activities on c hild r ights a nd
make recommendations fo r the ir effecti ve impl e me ntati on .
7. 1b undertake a nd promote research in the
field of child r ights.
8 . Th spread child rights literacy among va rious sectio ns of the soc ie ty and promote
awa ren ess of t he safeguards ava ilabl e for
protection of these righ ts.
9. 1b inspect any juvenne custodia l home or
any other place of residence or institution
( under the control of the state gove rnment or any other autho rity, including
a ny institution r un by a social organisation) where children are detained or
lodged for the purpose of treatment, reformation or protection and take up with
these authorities for remedia l action.
10. 1b inquire into complai nts a nd take suomotu notice of matters relating to the
following and take-up the issues ar iSi ng
out of these matters with appro pri ate
a uthorities:
(i) de privatio n an d vio lation of chi ld
rights;
(ii) non -imp le me n tat ion of laws provid ing fo r protection and development of ch ildren; an d
(iii) non-comp lia nce of poli cy decisions
or in structions aimed at mitigating
hardshi p s a nd e n surin g we lfare
a nd providing relief to children.
]1. 1b perform such other functions as it may
consider necessa ry for the promotion of
c hild rights.

Powers
The state co mmissio n, while inqu iring into
a ny matter, has a ll t he powers of a civil cou rt
trying a suit a nd in particular in respect of
the following matters:
(a) sllmmoni ngand enforcin g the attendance
of a ny person a nd examining him/ her
on oath;
(b) requiring th e discovery and produ ction
of a ny document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;

National Commission (or Protection of Child Rights

(d) requisitioning any public record from any
court or office; and
(e) issuing summons for the examination of
witnesses or documents.

Working:
The sta te commission may take any of the
fo llowi ng steps upon the completion of an
inquiry:
(i) It may recommend to the state government
or authority the initiation of proceedings
for prosecution or such other suitable
action against the concerned person.
( ii) It may approach the Supre me Court or
the State High Court for the necessary
directions, o rders or writs.
(iii) It may recomm end to the state governm ent or authority for the grant of necessa ry interim relief to the victi m.
The state commissio n submits its annua l or
special reports to the sta te government. These
reports are laid before the state legislature,
along with a memorandum of action taken on
the recommendations of the state comm ission

~ 489

a nd the reasons for non-acceptance of any of
such recommendations 7 •

t CHILDREN ' S COURTS
The Co mmi ssio ns for Protection of Child
Rights Act (2005) also provides for the establi shment of Children's Courts for the speedy
trial of offe nces against children or of violation of child rights.
Thus, the sta te governm ent m ay spec ify at
least a court in the state or specify for each
di strict a Court of Session to be a Children's
Court. These co urts ca n be 'set up by the sta te
government only with the concurrence of the
Chief Justice of the High Court of that state.
For every Children 's Court, the state governm ent specifi es a public prosecutor or appoints
an advocate (who has practiced for seven years)
as a special public prosecutor for the purpose
of co nducting cases in that court.
'Before each House of State Legislature where it
consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature
consist of one House, before that House.

CHAPTER

61

National Commission
for Minorities

t ESTABLISHMENT
Tn 1978, the Gover nme nt of India vide an
execu tive rcso )ution l , set up a Minorities
Comm ission to sa feguard the interests of the
minorities. The resolu tion explained th e rea·
son s for the esL.1bJishment of th e Min orities
Co mmi ssion in the fo ll owing way:
'Despite the safeguards provided in the
Co nstitution and the laws in force, there

persists among the Minorities a feeling

of in equality a nd di scrimination. In
order to preserve secu la r tradition s a nd
to promote Nat ional Integration, the
Government of Indi a attaches the highest importance to t he e nforce ment of
the sa feguards provid ed for the Mi n orities a nd is of fi rm view t ha t e ffecti ve
in stitutiona l arrange ments a rc urgently
required for th e enforcement an d implc.
me ntatio n of all the safegu a rds provided
for the Min orities in t he Co n stitution ,
in the Ce ntral a nd State Laws a nd in the
Government poli cies and administrative
sche mes en u nciated from time to t im e'.
Later, it was fe lt that the Minorities Co m·
mission be given statutory status so that it
may infu se co nfiden ce among the minorities
about the working a nd the effectiveness of the
Co mmi ssio n. It wou ld the n a lso ca rry more
we ight with the State Gove rnme nts/U nion
'Territory Admin istratio ns a nd the Ministries/
iReso lution dated 12tll J a nua ry, 1978 issued by the
Min istry of Home Affai rs.

Departme nts a nd the other organ isations of
th e Central Govern ment.
Wi th the enactme nt of th e Nationa l
Co mmi ss io n for Minorities Act, 1992 2, the
Minorities Co mmiss ion beca me a statutory
body and was renamed th e Nation al Comm is·
sia n fo r Minorities. The first statutory Com·
mi ss ion was co n stitu ted in 1993.
The Co mmi ssion is an autonomous body.
It works under the administrative co ntrol of
the Ministry of Minority Affairs3 , Government
of India.
The Act does not de fin e the term 'm inority',
but e nables the Ce ntral Government to notify
' minoriti es' for the pu rposes of the Act. Accord·
in gly, the Ce nt re in ] 993 notified five religious
communities, viz. Muslims, Chri stia ns, SHills,
Buddhjsts and 'l£Jroastrians ( Parsis) as m inority
co mmunities. In 2014, the Ja in com munity was
added to thi s list.4

t COMPOSITION
The Co mmi ssion is a multi·member body
co nsisting of a Chairperso n, a Vice·Chairper·
so n a nd five mem be rs. 5 They a re nominated
1'his Act c.:1 me into force on 17th May, 1993.
~he Ministry of Minority Affairs was carved out of
the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment in
2006.
~No tifi cation dated 27th J a nua ry, 2014 issued by the
Ministry of Minority Affairs.
sBefore the Na tio na l Commi ss io n fo r Mino rities
(A mendment) Act, 1995, the Commission consisted
of a Chairperson a nd six mem bers.

. NaMnal Commission for Minorities ~

by the Central Government from amongst
persons of eminence, ability and integrity.
However, five members including the Chairperson should be from amongst the minority
communities.
The salaries, allowances and other serv ice
conditions of the Chairman and members a re
also prescri bed by the Central Government
(Ministry of Minority Affairs). Notabl y, members include the Vice-Chairperson. 6
The chairperson and members hold office
for a period of three years. However, they ca n
relinquish their office at any time by addressing
their resignation to the Central Government.
Further, the Central Government can also
remove the Chairperson or a member from the
office (before the expiry of the term) under
any of the following circumstances:
1. Becomes an undischarged insolvent
2. Gets convicted and sentenced to impri sonment for an offence which (i n the
opinion of the Central Government)
involves moral turpitude
3. Declared of unsound mind by a competent court
4. Refuses to act or becomes incapabl e of
acting
5. Absents from three consecutive meetings
of the Commission 7
6. Abused official position that (in the opinion of the Central Government) renders
continuance in the office as detrimental
to the interests of minorities or the public interest

t FUNCTIONS

The Commission is provided with the following nine-point mandate:
1. Th evaluate the progress of the development of minorities under the Union and
States
2. 1b monitor the working of the safeguards for minorities provided in the
6A,dded by the Na tional Commi ssion for Minorities
'(Amendment) Act, 1995.
7Without obtaining lea"e of absence from the
Commission.

491

Constitution and in laws enacted by
Parliament a nd the state leg islatures
3. 1b make reco mmendation s for the effective implementation of safeguards for
the protection of the interests of minorities by the Central Government or the
State Governments
4. 1b look into specific complaints regarding deprivation of rights and safeguards
of minorities and take up such matters
with the appropriate authorities
5. 1b cause studies to be undertaken into the
problems arising out of any discrimination against minorities and recommend
measures for their remova l
6 . 1b conduct studies, resea rch and analysis
on the issues relating to soc io-economic
and educational de ve lopment of
minorities
7. To sugges t appropriate mea sures in
respect of any minority to be undertaken by the Cen tra l Government or the
Sta te Governments
8. Th make periodical or special reports to
the Central Government on any mat·
ter pertaining to minoriti es and in
particular the diffi c ulties confronted
by th em
9. 1b look into any other matter referred to
it by the Ce ntral Government

t POWERS
The Co mmi ssion, while evaluating/monitoring any m atter or inquiring into any
co mplaint, ha s all the powers of a civil court
try ing a su it and in particular in respect of
the following matters:
1. Summoning and enforcing the attendance
of a ny perso n fro m a ny part of India
and examining him /her on oath
2. Requiring the di scovery and produ ction
of any docu me nt
3. Receiving evidence on affidavits
4. Requisitioning any public record from
any court or office
5. Issu ing summon s for the examination of
witnesses a nd documents

492

P

Indian Polity

6. Any oth e r matter which may be prescribed by th e Ce ntra l Governm ent

t REPORT
The Com mi ss ion presents a n annual report to
the Cent ra l Gove rnm e nt. It can a lso sub mi t a
report as and when it thinks necessary.
The Centra l Gove rnm e nt places a ll such
reports before each House of Parliament, a long
with a mem ora ndum ex plaining the action
ta ke n on the recommendations made by th e
Co mmi ss ioll. The me morandum should also

contain the reasons for t he non-accepta nce of
any of such recommendations.
If a ny such re port is re lated to a ny matter with which any State Government is
co nce rn ed, then the Co mmi ss io n forwards
a copy of such report to s uch State Gove rnmen t. The Sta te Government places it before
t he state leg isl atu re, alon g with a memora ndum exp lainin g the act ion take n on t he
recommendat ions of the Com mi ssio n. The
me m ora n dum should also co ntain the reasons for the nOll-acceptance of any of such
recom mc nciation s.

Central Information
Commission

he Central Information Commission
was established by the Central Government in 2005. It was constituted under
the provisions of the Right to Information Act
(2005). Hence, it is not a constitutional body.
The Centrallnfonnation Co mmission is a
high-powered independent body which inter
alia looks into the complaints made to it and
decide the appeals. It e ntertains co mplaints
'and appeals perta ining to offices, financial
institutions, public secto r undertakings, etc.,
under the Central Government and the Union
Thrritories.

T

t COMPOSITION
The Commission consists of a Chief Information Commission er and not more than
ten Information Commissioners. They are
a ppointed by the President on the reco mmendation of a committee consisting of the
Prime Minister as Chairperson, the Leader of
Opposition] in the Lok Sabha and a Union
Cabinet Minist.er nominated by the Prim e
Minister. They should be pe rson s of eminence in publi c life with wide knowledge and
experience in law, science and technology,
social selVice, management, journalism, ma ss
m edia or administration and governance.
They should not be a Member of Parliam ent
or Member of the Legislature of any State or
IWhere the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha has
not been recognized as such, the Leader of the single
largest group in opposition of the Government in
the Lok Sabha shall be deemed to be the Leader of
the Opposition.

Union Territory. They should not hold a ny
other office of profit or connected with any
political party or carrying on any business
or pursuing any profession .

j

TENURE AND SERVICE
CONDITIONS

The Ch ief lnfonnation Commi ssio ner a nd a n
Information Commissioner shall hold offi ce
for such term as prescribed by the Ce ntral
Government or until t hey atta in the age of
65 years, whichever is earlier. They are not
eligible for reappointment 2 •
The President can remove the Chief Information Commission er or any Information
Co mmissioner from the office under the following circumstances:
(a) if he/ she is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) ifhe/she has been convicted of an offence
which (in the opinion of the Pres ident)
invo lves a moral turpitude; or
(e) if he/she engages during his/ her term of
office in any paid e mploym ent outside
the duties of hi s/ h er office; or
(d) if he/she is (in the opinion of the
President) unfit to continue in office
du e to infirmity of mind or body; or
(e) if he/she has acquired such financial or
other interest as is likely to affect prej udicially his/ her official functions.
~e Information Commissione r is eligible for

a ppointment as Chief Information Commissioner
but cannot hold offi ce for more than a total of
fi ve years including hislher term as Information
Commissioner.

494

i!

Indian Polity

In addit ion to these, the President ca n a lso
remove the Ch ief In formation Comm ission er
or any In formation Comm issio n er on the
ground of proved mi sbehaviour or in ca paciti·
However, in these cases, the President ha s to
refer th e matter to th e Supreme Court for an
enquiry. If the Suprem e Court, after the enquiry,
upholds the cause of remova1 and adv ises so,
tJlen the President can remove him/ her.
The sa lary, a ll owances and other service
conditions of t he Chief In formation Com·
mi ss ioner and a n Information Commissioner
shall be suc h as prescribed by the Centra l
Government. But, th ey cannot be va ried to
hi s/ he r di sadva ntage durin g se rvice.

t POWERS AND FUNCTIO NS

The powers and functions of the Cent ral
In formation Co mmi ssio n are:
1. It is the duty of the Comm issio n to rece ive
and inquire in to a compla int from any
person:
(a) who ha s not been ab le to subm it an
information request because of nonappointment ofa Pub lic Information
Officer;
(b) who has been refused information
that was requested;
(c) who has not received response to hi s/
her in format ion request within the
specified time limits;
(d) who thinks th e fees c harged are
unreaso nable;
(e) who thinks information give n is
in co mp lete, misleading or fa lse;
and
(I) any othe r matte r relating to obta ining information.
3 He / she is deemed to

be guilty of misbehaviour, jf
he/ she is co ncerned or interested in any contract
or agreeme nt made by the Central Government or
participates in any way in the profit OfSllCh contract
or agreement or in any benefit or emolument arising
there fTom othem'ise than as a member and jn
common with the other me mbers of an incorporated
company.

2. The Commission ca n order inquiry into
any matter if t h ere are rea sonable
grounds (s uo-mote power) .
3. While in qu iring, the Commission has the
powers of a civi l court in respect of th e
fo ll owing matters:
(a) su mmonin g and enforcing ou tendan ce of perso ns and compelling
them to give oral or written evi dence on oath and to produce documents or t hings;
(b) req uir ing the discove ry and in spection of docum ents;
(c) receiving eviden ce on a ffida vit;
(d) requ is itioni ng any pub li c record
from any court or office;
(c) issuing summons for exam in ation of
witnesses or documents; a nd
(f) any ot her matte r whic h may be
presc ribed.
4 . During the inquiry of a co mplaint , the
Co mmi ssion may examine any reco rd
wh ich is under the control of the public
authority and no such record may be
withheld from it on a ny grou nds. In other
wo rds, a ll publ ic records must be given
(Q the Com m ission during inquiry for
exam in ation.
5. The Commi ssion has the powe r to secure
compliance of its decisions from the
publi c a uthor ity. This includes:
(a) providing access to in format ion in a
particular for m;
(b) dire cti ng th e publi c authority to
appo int a Public Inform ation Office r
where no ne exists;
(c) publishing information or categories
of informatio n ;
(d) making necessary c ha nges to the
practices relatin g to management,
ma in te n an ce a nd dest ru ction of
records;
(e) enhanci ng training provisio n for officials on the righ t to i nformatio n ;
(f) seeking an annua l report from the
pub lic authority on complian ce with
th is Act;

Centra/InfOrmation Commission

(g) reqUiring the public authority to
compensate for any loss or other
detrimen~ suffered by the applicant;
(h) imposing penalties under th)s Act";
"a nd
(i) rejecting the application.
"The Commission can impose a penalty on the Public
Infonnation Officer at the rate oH250 per day upto
a maximum of f25,OOO. It can also recommend for
disciplinary action against the errant official.

I

J

...

~ 495

6. The Commission submits an annual
report to the Central Government on
the implementation of the provisions
of this Act. The Central Government
places this report before each House of
Parliament.
7. When a public authority does not conform to the provisions of this Act, the
Commission may recommend (to the
authority) steps which ought to be taken
for promoting such conformity.

,

CHAPTER

T

63

he Right to Information Act of 2005

provides for the creation of not only
the Central Information Commission

but also a State Information Commission
at the state level. Accordingly, a ll the states

have constituted the State Information
Commissions.
The State Information Commission is a

high-powered independent body which interalia looks into the complaints made to it and

decide the appeals. It entertains complaints

and appeals pertaining to offices, financia l
institutions, public sector undertakings, etc.,
under the concerned state government.

t COMPOSIT ION
The Commission consists of a State Chief

Information Commissioner and not more than

ten State Information Commissionersl. They

are appointed by the Governor on the recommendation of a committee consisting of the
Ch ief Minister as Chairperson, the Leader of
Opposition in the Legislative Assembly and
a State Cabinet Minister nominated by the
Chief Ministerz. They should be persons of
eminence in public life with wide knowledge
and experience in law, science and technology, social service, management, journalism,
lThe number of State Infonnation Commissioners
varies from one state to another state.
2Where the Leader of Opposition in the Legislative
Assembly has not been recognized as such, the
Leader of the single largest group in opposition of
the Government in the Legislative Assembly shall
be deemed to be the Leader of the Opposition.

State Information
Commission

mass media or administration and governance.
They should not be a Member of Parliament
or Member of the Legislature of any State or
Union Thrritory. They should not ho ld any
other office of profit or connected with any
political party or carrying on any business or
pursuing any profession.

j CONDITIONS
TENURE AND SERVICE
The State Chief Information Commissioner
and a State Information Commissioner shal1
hold office for such term as prescribed by the
Central Government or until they attain the
age of65 years, whichever is earlier. They are
not eligible for reappointmentJ .
The Governor can remove the State Chief
Information Commissioner or any State
Information Commissioner from the office
under the following circumstances:
(a) if he/she is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) if he/she has been convicted of an offence
which (in the opinion of the Governor)
involves a mora l turpitude; or
(c) if he/she engages during his/her term of
office in any paid employment outside
the duties of his/her office; or
(d) if he/she is (in the opinion of the
Governor) unfit to continue in office
due to infirmity of mind or body; or
>rhe State Information Commissioner is eligible
for appointment as State Chief Information
Commissioner but cannot hold office for more
than a total of five years including his/her term as
State Information Commissioner.

State Information Commission ~

(e) if he/she has acquired such financial or
other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his/her official functions.
In addition to these, the Governor can also
remove the State Chief In formation Commissioner or any State Information Commissioner on the ground of proved misbehaviour
or incapacity4. However, in these cases,
the Governor has to refer the matter to the
Supreme Court for an enquiry. If the Supreme
Court, after the enquiry, upholds the cause of
removal and advises so, then the Governor
can remove him.
The sa lary, allowances and other service
conditions of the State Chief In formation
Commissioner and a State Information Commissioner shall be such as prescribed by the
Central Government. But, they cannot be
varied to his/her disadvantage during service.

t POWERS AND FUNCTIONS
The powers and functions of the State Information Commission are:
1. It is the duty of the Commission to receive
a nd inquire into a complaint from any
person:
(a) who has not been able to submit
an information request because
of non-appointment of a Public
Information Officer;
(b) who has been refused information
that was requested;
(c) who has not received response to his/
h er information request within the
specified time limits;
(d) who thinks the fees charged are
unreasonable;
(e) who thinks information given is
incomplete, misleading or false; and
4He/she is deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour, if
he/she is concerned or interested in any contract
or agreement made by the State Government
or participates in any way in the profit of such
contract or agreement or in any benefit or
emolument arising there from otherwise than as a
'member and in common with the other members
of an incorporated company.

497

(f) any other matter relating to obtaining
information.
2. The Commission can order inquiry into
any matter if there are reasonable
grounds (suo-moto power).
3. Whi1e inquiring, the Commission has the
powers of a civil court in respect of the
follOwing matters:
(a) summoning and enforcing attendance of persons and compe11ing
them to give oral or written evidence on oath and to produce documents or things;
(b) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents;
(c) re'c eiving evidence on affidavit;
(d) requisitioning any public record
from any court or office;
(e) issuing summons for examination of
witnesses or documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be
prescribed.
4. During the inquiry of a complaint, the
Commission may examine any record
which is under the control of the public authority and no such record may
be withheld from it on any grounds. In
other words, all pubJic records must be
given to the Commission during inquiry
for examination.
5. The Commission has the power to secure
compliance of its decisions from the
public authority. This includes:
(a) providing access to information in a
particular form;
(b) directing the public authority to
appoint a Public Information Officer
where none exists;
(c) publishing infonnation or categories
of information;
(d) making necessary changes to the practices relating to management, maintenance and destruction of records;
(e) enhancing training provision for officia ls on the right to information;
(f) seeking an annual report from the
public authority on comp lian ce
with this Act;

498

,gJ Indian Pality

(g) requiring th e publi c authority to
co mpen sate for any loss or other
detriment suffered by the applicant;
(h) imposing penalties under t hi s Act5 ;
and
(i) rejecting the application.
6. The Com mi ss ion sub mits an annual
report to the State Government on the
implementation of the provisions of
this Act. The State Government places
this report be fore the State Legislature.
7. When a public authority does not conform to the provisions of this Act, the
Co mmission may recommend (to the
authority) steps which ought to be ta ken
for promo ting such conformity.

t RTI AMENDMENT ACT, 2019
Th e various features or provisions of the
Right to Information (Amendment) Act, 2019
are as follows:
1. It provided that the Chief Inform ation
Co mmi ss ioner and an Information
Com mi ssioner sh a ll hold office for
such term as prescribed by the Ce ntral
Government. Before thi s a mendm ent,
their term was fixed for 5 years.
2. It provided that the salary, allowances
and other serv ice co nditions of the
Chief Information Commissioner and an
s-rhe Commission can impose a penalty on the
Public Information Officer at the rate of 't2S0
per day up to a maximum of~2S,OOO. It can also
recommend for disciplinary action against the
errant official.

Information Commiss ioner shall be such
as prescribed by the Central Government.
Before this amendment, the salary, allowances and other service co ndition s of
the Chief Informa tion Comm issio ner
were sim ilar to those of the Ch ief
Election Co mmi ssio ne r and that of an
Information Comm issioner were simila r
to those of an Election Com missioner.
3. It provided that the State Ch ief information Commissioner and a State
Information Com mi ssioner shall hold
office for such term as presc ribed by the
Centra l government. Before this amendment, their term was fixed for 5 years.
4. It provided that the sa lary, allowances
and other service co nditions of the State
Chief Info rmation Co mmi ssio ner and a
State Information Com mi ssioner sha ll
be such as prescribed by the Ce ntral
Government. Before this amendment,
the sa lary, allowances and other service
conditions of the State Chief Informatio n
Commissioner were similar to those of
an Election Commissione r and that of
a State Information Co mmissioner were
similar to those of the Chief Secretary of
the state government.
5. It removed the provisions regarding
deductions in salary of the Chief information Co mmissioner, an Info rmation
Comm issioner, the State Chi ef Information Commissioner and a State
Information Commissioner due to pension or any other retirement ben efits
rece ived b y them for their previous
government serv ice.

CHAPTER
-

64

Central V ig il a n c e
Commission

•

\i

t ESTABLISHMENT ;

\

•• 1

The Ce ntr al Vig ilan ce Co mm iss
ion (eV e) is
the ma in age ncy for pre ven tin
g cor rup tio n
in the Cen tral gov ern me nt. It was
est abl ish ed
in 1964 by an exe cut ive res olu
tio n of the
.Ce ntr al gov ern me nt. Its est abl
ish me nt was
rec om me nde d by the San tha nam
Co mm itte e
on Preven tio n of Co rru ptio n I (19
62- 64) .
Thu s, ori gin ally the eve was
nei the r a
con stit uti ona l bod y nor a sta
tut ory bod y.
Later, it was con fer red sta tut ory
sta tus by
the Ce ntr al Vig ilan ce Co mm iss
ion Act, 2003
(CYC Act, 200 3).
The eve has bee n designated as the
agency
to receive and act on com pla ints
or disclosure
on any alle gat ion of cor rup tion
or mis use of
office from whistle blowers und er
the "Public
Inte res t Dis clo sur e and Pro tect ion
of Inf orm ers '
Resolution " (PlOPI), 2004, which
is pop ula rly
kno wn as "Whistle Blowers" Res
olution. The
eve is also empowered as the onl y designate
d
agency to tak e act ion aga ins t com
pla ina nts
ma kin g motivated or vexatious com
pla ints . 2
The evc is con cei ved to be the
ape x vigi-lan ce ins titu tion , free of con tro
l fro m any
executive aut hor ity, mo nit ori ng
all vig ilan ce
aet ivit y und er the Cen tral Go ver
nm ent and
advising var iou s aut hor itie s in Cen
tral Governme nt org ani sat ion s in pla nni ng,
exe cut ing ,
re" iew ing and ref onn ing the ir vig
ilan ce work.
IThe Com mit tee on Pre ven tion of
Cor rup tion with
par liam ent aria n K. San tha nam
as the Cha irm an ,
five oth er MPs and two sen ior officers
as mem bers,
'~a~ app oin ted by the Gov ern men t
of Ind ia in 1962.
lAn nua l Report 2021, Central Vig
ilance Commission,
p. 11.

t COMPOSITION

The evc is a multi-member body
consisting of
a Central Vigilance Commissioner
(chairperson)
and not more tha n two vigilance com
missioners.
They are app oin ted by the President
by wa rran t
under his /he r han d and seal on the
recommendation of a three-member com mit tee
consisting of
the pri me min iste r as its head, the
Un ion minister of hom e affairs and the Leader
of
the Opposition Za in the Lok Sabha. The y hol
d office for a
term of four years or unt il the y atta
in the age of
sixty five years, whichever is earlier
. After the ir
tenure, they are not eligible for fur
ther employme nt und er the Central or a state gov
ern me nt
'1'1 •
Th e Pre sid ent can rem ove
the Ce ntr al
Vig ilan ce Co mm iss ion er or any
vig ilan ce
com mis sio ner from the off ice und
er the follow ing circ um sta nce s:
(a) If he/ she is adj udg ed an ins
olv ent ; or
(b) If he/ she has bee n convicted of
an offence
which (in the opi nio n of the Cen tral
govern me nt) involves a mo ral turp itud
e; or
(c) If he/ she engages, dur ing his
/ her term of
office, in any pai d em plo ym ent
out sid e
the dut ies of his / her office; or
(d) If he/ she is (in the opi nio n of
the President), unf it to con tinu e in office by
reason
of inf irm ity of min d or body; or
(e) If he/ she has acq uir ed suc h fin
anc ial or
oth er inte res t as is like ly to affe ct
pre judic iall y his / her off icia l fun ctio ns.
ZaW her e the Leader of Opp osit ion
in the Lok Sabha
has not bee n recogni sed as such,
the Leader of the
sing le largest gro up in opp osit ion
of the Governme nt in the Lok Sab ha sha ll be dee
med to be the
Leader of the Opp osit ion .

500

P

'ndion Polity

In addition to th ese, th e Pres ident can
a lso remove t he Ce ntral Vigilance Co mmi ssiOller or a ny vigilance co mmi ss ioner on the
ground of proved mi sbehaviour or incapacity.
However, in these cases, t he President has to
refer the matter to the Supreme Co urt for
a n en quir:)'_ If the Supreme Co urt, after the
enquiry, upholds the ca use of remova l and
advises so, the n the Preside nt ca n re move
him / h e r. !-le/ she is deemed to be gu ilty of
misbehav iour, if he/she (a) is con ce rned or

interested in any contract or agree ment made
by the Central government, or (b) participates

in any way in th e profit of suc h co ntrac t or
agreem ent or in a ny benefit or e molum ent
arisi ng therefrom otherwise than as a m e mbe r and in co m mon with t he other m e mbers
of a n in corporated com pany.
The sa lary, a ll owa n ces a nd othe r condi tion s of serv ice of the Ce ntral Vigilan ce
Co mmi ssio n e r a re si milar to t hose of t he
Chairm an of UPSC and that o f th e vigilan ce
commiss io ner are si milar to those ofa member of upse. But they cannot be va ried to hi s/
he r di sadvantage afte r hi s/ he r ap po intm e nt.

l ORGANISATIO N
The evc has its own Secreta riat, Chi ef Tec hni ca l Exa min e rs' Wing (erE) a nd a wing of
Co mmi ss ion ers for De partmenwl Inquir ies
(C Dls).

Secretariat: The Secretariat con sists of a Secretary, Joint Secretaries, Dep uty Sec retari es,
Under Secre tar ies and offi ce staff.
Chief Technical Examiners ' Wing: The Chi ef
'Techn ica l Exa miners' Orga ni sa tio n co nstitutes the technica l wing of th e evc. It con s ists of Chi ef Engineers (des ignated as Chi ef
Thchnica l Exa min ers) and supporting e ng ineerin g staff. Th e main fu nction s assig ned
to thi s organ isa tion are as fo ll ows:
(i) Thchnica l audit of constru ction works of
Gove rnment organisations from a vigila n ce a ngle
(ii) Invest iga tio n of specific cases of complaints relat in g to construct io n wo rks

( iii) Exte nsion of ass ista nce to CB I in the ir
investigatio ns in vo lvin g techni ca l ma tters an d for eva lu at io n of propert ies in
Delhi
(iv) Thndering of advice / assista nce to the CVC
and Chi ef Vigila nce Offi cers 2b in vigila nce
cases involving techni c..1 1 matters

Commissioners for Departmental Inquiries : Th e
CDl s fun ction as Inqu iry Office rs to condu ct
oral inquiries in departmental proceedings
initiated agai n st publi c serva nts.

l FUNCTIONS
The fu n cti ons of the cve are:
1. 1b inquire or ca use an inquiry or in vest igation to be co ndu cted o n a referen ce made by the Ce ntral government
wherein it is alleged tha t a publ ic se rva nt being an em pl oyee of the Ce ntral
government or its a uthorities 3 , has commi tted a n offen ce under the Prevention
of Corruption Act , !H8B.
2. 1b inq ui re or cause a n inquiry or in vestigation to be condu cted into any co mplaint a gain st a ny officia l bel o ng ing
to th e be low m e nti o n ed cat egory of
officia ls wherein it is a ll eged that he /
she has co mmitted a n offence und er the
Prevention of Co rruption Act , 1988:
(a) Members of all-Indiil sen r ices4 serving
in the Union and Group 'A' officers
of th e Ce ntra l government; and
(b) Specified level of officers of the authoritie s of the Ce ntral gove rnm e n t.
2"The Chief Vigilan ce Office r is the head of the
Vigilance Division of the Mi nistries/ Depa rtm en ts!
Organisations of the centml governme nt. He/ she
assists and advises the Secreta ry/ Head in all vigilance matters.
:l.y-he a uthorities of the Central government include
a co rporation established by or under any Central
act and gove rnm e nt co mpany, society and any
loca l a utho rity owned or co ntroll ed by the Centra l
gove rnment
~he All-India Services incl ude Indian Administrati ve Service (lAS), Indian Po lice Sen 'icc ( IPS) and
Indian Fo rest Se n ' icc (lFoS).

(

Cenual Vigilance Commission

3. Th exercise superintendence over the
functioning of the, Delhi Special Police
Establishment (CBI) insofar as it relates
to the investigation of offences under
the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
4. Th give directions to the Delhi Special
Police Establishment (CBI) for super·
intendence insofar as it relates to the
invest igation of offences under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
5. 'Ib review the progress of investigations
conducted by the Delhi Special Police
Establishment into offences alleged to
have been committed under the preven·
tion of Corruption Act, 1988.
6. Th review the progress of applications
pending with the competent authorities
for sanction of prosecution under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
7. Th tender advise to the Central govern·
ment and its authorities on such matters
as are referred to it by them.
8 . 1b exercise superintendence over the
vigilance administration in the minis·
tries of the Central government or its
authorities.
9. Th underta ke or cause an inquiry into
complaints received under the Public
Interest Disclosure and Protection of
Informers' Resolution and recommend
appropriate action.
10. The Ce ntral Government is required to
consult the CVC in making rules and
regulations governing the vigilance
and disciplinary matters relating to the
members of Central Services and All·
India Services.

l JURISDICTION
The jurisdiction of the CVC extends to the
following: 5
1. Members of All India Services serving in
connection with the affairs of the Union
and Group A officers of the Central
Government.
SAnnual Report 2021, Central Vigilance Commission,
pp.1O-11.

~ 501

2. Officers of the rank of Scale V and above
in the Public Sector Banks.
3. Officers in Grade D and above in Reserve
Bank of India, NABARD and 8IDB!.
4. Chief Executives and Executives on the
Board and other officers of E-8 and
above in Schedule 'A' and 'B' Public
Sector Undertakings.
5. Chief Executives and Executives on the
Board and other officers of E·7 a nd
above in Schedule 'C' and 'D' Public
Sector Undertakings.
6. Managers and above in General Insurance
Co mpanies.
7. Senior Divisional Managers and above in
Life Insurance Corporation.
8. Officers drawing salary of f8700/· per
month (pre·revised) and above on
Central Government D.A. pattern, as
may be revised from time to time, in
societies and loca l authorities owned or
controlled by the Central Government.

l WORKING
The CVC co nducts its proceedings at its head·
quarters (New Delhi). It is vested with the
power to regulate its own procedure. It has
all the powers of a civil court and its proceedings have a judicial chara cter. It may call
for information or report from the Central
government or its authorities so as to enable
it to exercise general supervision over the
vigilance and anti-corruption work in them.
The CVC, on receipt of the report of the
inquiry undertaken by any agency on a ref·
erence made by it, advises the Central gov·
ernment or its authorities as to the further
course of action. The Central government or
its authorities shall co nsider the advice of the
CVC and take appropriate action. However,
where the Ce ntral government or any of its
authorities do not agree with the advice of the
evc, it shall communicate the reasons (to be
recorded in WTiting) to the CVC.
The CVC has to present annually to the
President a report on its performance. The
President places this report before each House
of Parliament.

502

P

Indian Polity

WHISTLE BLOWERS
PROTECTION ACT (2014)
The salient features of the Wh istle Blowers
Protectio n Act (2014)6 a re as fol1ows\
1. The Act p rovides a mechanism for protect ing t he identity of whistle blowers
(a term given to peop le who expose
corrupt ion). People who expose co rrupt ion in Governme n t or irregularit ies by public funct ionaries can now
be free of any fear of victimizat ion.
2. The Act a lso provides for a system to
encourage people to disclose information abo u t corrupt ion or the wilfu l
m isuse of powe r by public servants,
includ ing min isters.
3. As per the Act, a pe rso n can make a
publi c interest disclosure on corruption
before a competen t au thority - which
is at prese n t the Central Vig i lance
Commissio n (CVC). The govern ment,
60 r iginally, the year ofthe Act was 201l. Later, it was
changed to 2014.
' T he India" Express, ~Whistleblowers Protection Act
gets President's nod~, May 13, 2014.

by notification, can appoint any other
body also for receiving such compla ints
about corruption.
4. The Act, however, lays down punishment
of up to two years in prison and a fine
of up to '{30,OOO for false or frivolo us
complaints.
5. The Act says that every disclosure shall
be made in good fa ith and the person
making the d isclosure shall provide a
persona l declaration stating that he/she
reasonably believes that the infonnation
disclosed by h imlher and the allegation
contained therein is substantia lly true.
6. Disclosures can be made in wri ting or
by email message in accordance with
the procedu re as may be prescribed and
con!:.:1in fu ll particulars and be accompanied by supporting documen ts, or other
material.
7. However, no action shall be taken on a
disclosure if it does not indicate the identity of the complaina n t or public servant
or if "the identity of the complai nant or
public servant is found to be incorrect."
8 . The Act is not applicable to the Special
Protection Grou p.

-

CHAPliER

65

t ESTABLISHMENT
The Centr al Burea u of Inves tigatio n (CSI)
traces its origin to the Specia l Police Establishm ent which was set up in 1941 by the
Gover nmen t of India. The functi ons of the
Specia l Police Estab lishm ent then were to
invest igate cases of briber y and corru ption
in transa ctions with the War and Suppl y
Depar tment of India during World War II. The
super intend ence of the Specia l Police Establishm ent was vested with this War and Supply
Depar tment . Even after the end of the War,
the need for a Centr al Gover nmen t agenc y to
invest igate cases of briber y and corru ption
by Centr al Gover nmen t emplo yees was felt.
There fore, the Delhi Specia l Police Establ ishment Act was broug ht into force in 1946. This
Act transf erred the super intend ence of the
Specia l Police Estab lishm ent to the Home
Depar tment and its functi ons were enlarg ed
to cover all depar tment s of the Gover nmen t
of India. 1
The CBI was establ ished in 1963 by a reso·
lution of the Minis try of Home Affairs, Governm ent of India. The Delhi Specia l Police
Estab lishm ent was also merge d with the CBI
and was made one of the divisi ons of the CBI.
Later, the CBI was transf erred to the Minis try
of Perso nnel 1a •
IThis inform ation is. obtain ed from the official
website of the Centra l Bureau of Investigation ,
Government of India.
layne CBI functio ns under the admin istrativ e control of the Depar tment of Person nel and 'Ihlini ng
(DoPT) of the Minist ry of Personnel.

Central Bureau of
Investigation

The CSI is not a statuto ry body. It derive s its
powers from the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946.
The CBI is the main invest igatin g agt:ncy
of the Centr al Gover nment . It plays an impor tant role in the preve ntion of corru ption and
maint aining integr ity in admin istrati on. It
also provid es assist ance to the Centr al Vigilance Comm ission and Lokpa l.
There is a differ ence betwe en the nature
of cases invest igated by the Natio nal Investigation Agenc y (NIA) and the CBL The NIA
has been consti tuted after the Mumh ai terror attack in 2008 mainl y for invest igatio n
of incide nts of terror ist attack s, fundin g of
terror ism and other terror relate d crime ,
where as the CBI invest igates crime of corruptio n, econo mic offenc es and seriou s and
organ ized crime other than terror ism.
It must be not~d here that the provis ions
of the Delhi Specia l Police Estab lishm ent Act
(1946) does not enabl e the CBI to exerci se
its power s and jurisd iction in any area in a
State (not being a railwa y area) witho ut the
conse nt of the Gover nmen t of that State. In
other words, the jurisd iction of the CBI can be
exten ded to the States only with the conse nt
of the State Gover nmen t conce rned.

t MOTTO, MISSION AND VISION

The motto , missio n and vision of the CSI are
as follows 2 :
Motto : Indus try, Impar tiality and I~tegrity
lntis infonn ation is obtained from the official website
of the Central Bureau of Investigation, Government
of India.

504

(?' Indian Polity

Mis s io n : To uphold t h e Co n stitution of
India and law of the land through in-depth
investiga tion and successful prosecutio n of
offences; to provide leadership and directio n
to police forces and to act as the noda l agency
for enhancing inter-state and interna tio nal
cooperation in law enforcement
Vision: Based Oil its motto, miss io l1 and the
l1eed to develop professionalism, trallspare;lcy,
adaptabi lity to c1w IIge and u.se of scie nce al1d
tec1111010gy ill its working, the eBl will focus 011
1. Combating corruption in publi c li fe,
curbing economic a nd violent crimes
through meti cu lous invest iga tio n and
prosecution
z. Evo lving effective systems and procedures
for successful investigation and prosecution of cases in various law co urts
3. Helping fight cyber and high technlliogy
crime
4. Creating a healthy work environmer:t that
encourages tcam-building, free com munication and mutual trust
5. Supporting state police organisations and
law enforcement agen cies in mr:ional
and internatio nal coopera t ion , paticularJy relating to enquiries a nd inv<:!stigation of cases
6. Play ing a lead role in the wa r against
nationa l and transna tional orgmised
crime
7. Upholdi ng human rights, protect:ng the
environment, arts, antiques and heritage of our civilisatio n
8 . Deve lop ing a scienti fic tempe r, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform
9. Striving for excellence and profeSSiona lism in all spheres of fu nct ioning so that
the organ isatio n ri ses to high I<;:vels of
endeavor a nd achievement.

r COMPOSITION
The CB I is headed by a Directo r. H ::/she is
assisted by special director(s) and additional
director(s) . Add ition all y, it has a number of
joi nt directors, deputy i nspector-Ecnerals,

superintendents of police and all other usua l
ranks of police perso nnel as well as forens ic
sc ie nti sts and law o ffi cers.
The Directo r of cm as Inspector-Gen eral
of Police, Delhi Special Police Establishment,
is responsibl e fo r the adm in istration o f the
organisation. Wi th the enactment ofCVC Act,
2003, the s uperintende nce of Delhi Specia l
Police Establishment vests with the Central
Governm ent save investiga tion s of offences
under the Preven tion of Corruption Act, 1988,
in which, the superin te nden ce vests with the
Ce ntra l Vigilance Co mmiss ion.
Th e Lokpa l a nd Lokay uktas Act (2013)
amended the Delhi Special Police Estab lishment Act ( 1946) and made the following
changes with respect to the composition of
the CBI:
1. The Ce ntral Government shall appoint
the Director of CEL o n the reco mmendation o f a th ree-m e mber committee
co n sist in g o f the Prime Min ister as
Chairperson, the Leader of Oppositi o n
in the Lok Sabha and the Chi ef Ju stice
of India o r Judge of the Supreme Court
nominated by him / h er.
2. There shall be a Directorate of prosecution headed by a Director for conducting
the prosecution of cases under the Lokpal
and LOkayUkt.:'lS Act, 2013. The Director of
Prosecution shall fun ction under the overall supervisio n and control of the Director
of CBI. He/she shall be appointed by the
Central Government on the recommendation of the Central Vigilance Commiss ion.
3. The Cen tral Governm ent shall appoint
officers of the rank of SP and above in
the CB I on the recommendation ofa committee consistin g of the Central Vigilance
Co mmi ss ioner as Chairperson , th e
Vigilance Co mmiss ioners, the Secretary
of the Ho me Min istry and the Secretary
of the Departm e nt o f Perso nnel.
Late r, the Delhi Special Poli ce Establishment (A mendment) Act, 20 14 made a change
in the composition of the committee related
to the appointment of the Director of CBI.
It states that where there is no recognized

Centrol Bureau of Investigation

~ 505

Leade r of Oppo sition in the Lok Sabha , then
the leade r of the single larges t oppos ition
party in the Lok Sabha would be a memb er
of that comm ittee.
Again, the Delhi Specia l Police Establishment (Ame ndme nt) Act, 2021 provid es for the
exten sion of the tenure of the Direc tor of CBl.
Under the eve Act, 2003, he/ she has a fixed
two-year tenure . But, the amen dmen t allowed
the centra l gover nmen t to extend his/ her tenure from two years to up to five years. However,
the exten sion can be given up to one year at
a time and no such extens ion is possib le after
the comp letion of a period of five years in
tota1, includ ing the two-year period of initial
appOi ntmen t. This means that he/ she can be
given three annua l extens ions. Furth er, such
extens ions may be grante d in public intere st,
on the recom mend ation of the Comm ittee
relate d to the initial appoi ntmen t and for the
reason s to be record ed in writin g.

(vi) Maint aining crime statistics and disseminating crimi nal inform ation.
The CBI is a multid iScipl inary invest igatio n
agenc y of the Gover nment of India and under takes invest igatio n of corrup tion-r elated cases,
econo mic offenc es and cases of conve ntiona l
crime. It nonna lly confin es its activit ies in the
anti-c orrup tion field to offenc es comm itted
by the emplo yees of the Centr al Gover nmen t
and Union Thrrit ories and their public sector under taking s. It takes up invest igatio n of
conve ntiona l crime s like murde r, kidna pping ,
rape etc., on refere nce from the state governments or when directed by the Supre me Court/
High Courts.
The CBI acts as the "Nati onal Centr al
Bureau" of Interp ol in India. The Interp ol
Wing of the CBI coord inates reque sts for
inves tigati on-re lated activi ties origin ating
from Indian law enfor cemen t agenc ies and
the memb er count ries of the Interp ol.

t FUNCTIONS

t PROVISION OF PRIOR PERMISSION

The functi ons of CBI are :
(i) Invest igatin g cases of corrup tion, briber y
and misco nduct of Centr al gover nmen t
emplo yees.
(ii) Invest igatin g cases relatin g to infring ement of fiscal and econo mic laws, that
is, breac h of laws conce rning expor t
and impor t contro l, custom s and centra l
excise, incom e tax, foreign exchange regulations and so on. However, such cases are
taken up either in consu ltation with or at
the request of the depar tment conce rned.
(iii) Inves tigati ng seriou s crime s, havin g
natio nal and intern ation al ramif ications, comm itted by organ ised gangs of
'profe ssiona l crimin als.
(iv) Coord inatin g the activi ties of the anticorru ption agenc ies and the variou s
state police forces
(v) Thkin g up, on the reque st of a state governme nt, any case of public impor tance
for invest igatio n.
3

l Ibido

The CBI is requi red to obtai n the prior
appro val of the Centr al Gover nmen t before
condu cting any inquir y or invest igatio n into
an offenc e comm itted by office rs of the rank
of joint secret ary and above in the Centr al
Gover nmen t and its autho rities.
However, in 2014, the Supre me Court held
as invali d the legal provi sion that make s
prior sanct ion mand atory for the CBI to
condu ct a probe again st senio r burea ucrats
in corru ption cases under the Preve ntion of
Corru ption Act. 4
A Const itutio n Bench held that Sectio n 6A
of the Delhi Specia l Police Estab lishm ent Act,
which grante d protec tion to joint secret ary
and above office rs from facing even a prelim inary inquir y by the CBI in corru ption cases,
was violat ive of Articl e 14.
Writin g the judgm ent, the CJI said, "Corruption is an enem y of {the] nation and tracki ng
down a corrup t public servan t, howsoever high
4The Hindu , "No sancti on neede d for CBI to

probe bureau crats: SC,~ May 7, 2014 .

. . . . . . . .__ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ ______

J

,
506

P

Indian Polity

he may be, and punishing such person is a
n ecessary mandate under the PC Act, 1988.
The status or position of a public ~ ervant does
not qualify the person from exemption from
equal treatment. The decisio n-mc: king power
does not segregate corrupt officf:rs into two
classes as they are common crim e doers and
have to be tracked down by the S:lme process
of inquiry and investigation."

t CBI VS. STATE POLICE
The role of the Del hi Special Poli,;e Establishment (a division of CBI) is sur plementary
to that of the state police forces. Along with
state police forces, the Delhi Srecial Police
Establishment (DSPE) enjoys ~ he concurrent powers of investigation and prosecution
for offences under the Delhi Special Police

Establishment Act, 1946. However, to avo id
duplication and ove rlapping of cases between
these two agencies, the following admin istrative arrangements have been made:
(i) The OSPE shall take up such cases which
are essentially and substantiall y concerned with the Central Government's
affairs or employees, eve n jf -t h ey
also involve certain state government
employees.
(li) Th e state poJice force shall take up such
cases which are substantially concernec.
with the state government's affairs or
e mployees, even if they a lso in volve
certa in Central Government employees.
(iii) The OSPE sha ll also take up cases
against employees of public unde rtakings or statutory bodies established and
financed by the Central Government.

Scan the QR Code to access the conceptual video on Discussion of
CAG, AGI, CBI and NIA - their autonomy and limitation
and other importan t topics on EDGE

'.

CHAPTER

66

t GLOBAL SCENARIO

,,

Modern democratic states are characterised
]:,y a welfare orientation. Hence, the govern~
ment has come to play an important role in
the socia-economic development of a nation.
This has resulted in the expansion of bureaucracy and the multiplication of administrative process, which in turTI increased the
administrative power and discretion enjoyed
by the civil servants at different levels of the
government. The abuse of this power and discretion by civil servants opens up scope for
harassment, malpractices, maladministration
and corruption. Such a situation gives rise to
citizens' grievances against administration 1,
The success of democracy and the realisation of socia-economic development depends
on the extent to which the citizens' grievances
are redressed. Therefore, the following institutional devices have been created in different
parts of the world to deal with the redressal
of these grievances:
1. The Ombudsman System
2. The Administrative Courts System
3. The Procurator System
The earliest democratic institution created in the world for the redressal of citizens'
grievance is the Scandinavian institution of
Ombudsman. Donald C. Rowat, an international expert on the institut~on of Ombudsman,
calls it a Nuniquely appropriate institution for
I According

to the Chambers Dictionary, grievance
means 'a ground of complaint; a condition felt to
be oppressive or wrongful'.

Lokpaland
Lokayuktas

dealing with the average citizens' complaints
about unfair administrative actions."
The institution of Ombudsman was first created in Sweden in 1809. 'Ombud' is a Swedish
tenn and refers to a person who acts as the representative or spokesman of another person.
According to Donald C. Rowat, Ombudsman
refers to "an officer appointed by the legislature to handle complaints against administrative and judicial action."
The Swedish Ombudsman deals with the
citizens' grievances in the following matters:
(i) Abuse of administrative discretion, that
is, misuse of official power and authority
(ii) Maladministration, that is, inefficiency
in achieving the targets
(iii) Administrative corruption, that is,
demanding bribery for doing things
(iv) Nepotism, that is, supporting one's own
kith and kin in matters like providing
employment
(v) Discourtesy, that is, misbehaviour ofvarious kinds, for instance, use of abusive
language.
The Ombudsman is a constitutional authority and enjoys the powers to supervise the
compliance of laws and regulations by the public officials, and see that they discharge their
duties properly. In other words, The authority
keeps a watch over all public officials-civil,
judicial and military-so that they function
impartially, objectively and legally, that is, in
accordance with the law. However, the authority has no power to reverse or quash a decision
and has no direct control over administration
or the courts.

508

,fi!

Indian Polity

The Ombudsman can act either on the
basis of a complaint rece ived from the citizen aga in st unfair admini strative action or
suo mota (Le. on hi s/her own initiative). The
authority can prosecute any erring official
including t he judges. However, it cannot
inflict any punishm ent. It only reports the
matter to the higher authori ties for taking
the necessary corrective action.
From Sweden , the institution of Ombudsman spread to other Scandinavian countriesFinland (1919), Denmark (1955) and Norway
( 1962). New Zealand is the first Commonwealth
country in the world to have adopted the
Ombudsman system in the form of a Parliamentary Commissioner for Investigation in ]962.
The United Kingdom adopted Ombudsman-like
institution called Parliamentary Commissioner
for Administration in ]967. Since then, many
other countie s of t he world have a dopted
Ombudsman·like institutions with different
nomencla ture a nd fun ctions. The Ombudsman
in India is called Lokpa l/Lokayukta.
Donald. C. Rowat says t hat the institution of
Ombudsman is a ''bu lkwork of democrati c gov·
emm ent aga inst the tyranny of officialdom."
While Gerald E. Ca iden , a scholar of Publi c
Administration, described the Ombudsman as
"institutionalised public conscien ce. N
Another unique institutional device cre·
ated for the redressa l of citizens' grievances
against administrative a uthoritie s, is th e
French system of Administrative Cou rts.
Du e to its success in France, t he syste m has
gradual1y sprea d to va rious other countr ies
of the wo rld.
Th e socia li st co untries like the form er
USSR (now Ru ssia) and China have c re·
ated the ir mvn in stitu tional device for the
redressa l of c itize ns' grievances. It is cal1ed
' Procurator Syste m ' in these countries.

~ POSITION IN INDIA
The existing legal and in st itutional fram e·
work to check corruption a nd redress c iti zen s'
grievances in India consists of the following:
• Publi c Servants (Enquiries) Act, ]850
• Indian Penal Code, 1860

• Special Poli ce Establishment, 194)
• Delhi Special Poli ce Establishme nt Act,
1946
• Prevention of Co rruption Act, 1988
• Benami Transactions (Prohibition ) Act,
1988
• Commissions of Inqui ry Act, 1952 (against
political leaders a nd e min en t ;mbli c
men)
• All·lndia Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968
• All-India Services (DiscipHne and Appeal)
Rules, 1969
• Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules, 1964
• Ce ntral Civil Services (Class ifi cation,
Control a nd Appea l) Rules, 1965
• Railway Ser vices (Condu ct) Rules, ] 966
• Vigilance orga ni sation s in min istries/
depa rtm en ts, a ttached and subordinate
offices and public undertakings
• Central Bureau of Investigation, ]963
• Central Vigilance Co mmiss ion, 1964
• State Vigilan ce Commissions, 1964
• An ti-corruption bureaus in states
• Lokpal (O mbudsman) at the Centre
• Lokayukta (O mbudsman ) in states
• Divisiona l Vigilance Board
District Vigilance Officer
• Nation a l, Sta te and District Con sum e r
Disputes Redressal Commi ssions
• Na tional Commi ss ion for SCs
• Nationa l Commiss ion for STh
• National Commission for BCs
• National Commi ssion for Minorities
• Supreme Court and High Courts in states
• Admini strative Tribuna ls (quas;·judicial
bodies)
• Directo rate of Publi c Grievances in th e
Cabinet Secretaria t, 1988
• Parliament a nd its committees
• 'File to Field' programme in some states
like Kerala. In this innovative schem e, the
administrator goes to the village/ area and
hears public grievances and takes immedi·
ate action wherever possible.
• Whi stle Blowe rs Protection Act, 2014
• Depa rtment of Administrative Reforms
a nd Publi c Grievances
Centrali sed Public Grievance Redress and
Monitoring System, 2007

Lokpal and Lokoyuktas

t LOKPAL
The First Administrative Reform s Co mmi ss ion (ARC) of Indi a ( 1966-1970) recommended the se tting up of two s pecial
authoritie s de sig nated as 'Lokpal' and
'iokayukta' for the redressa l of citizens'
grievances z: These in stitution s were to be
set up on the pattern of the in stitution of
Ombuds man in Scandinavian countries and
the parliamentary commissioner for investigation in New Zea land. The Lokpal would
deal with comp laints against mini sters and
secretaries at Central and sta te levels, and
the lokayukta (one at the Ce ntre and one
in every state) would deal with co mplaints

again st other spec ified higher official s. The
ARC kep t the judiciary outside the purview
of LokpaJ and lokayukta as in New Zealand.
But, in Sweden th e judic ia ry is within th e
purview of Ombudsman .
According to the ARC, the Lokpal would be
appointed by the Pres ident after con sultation
with the chief just ice of Indi a, the Speaker
of Lok Sabha a nd the Chairman of th e Rajya
Sabha.
The ARC a lso reco mmended that the in stitutions of Lokpal and lokay ukta sh o uld have
the following features:
1. They should be demonstrati vely independent a nd impartial.
2. T h e ir invest iga ti o n s and proceedings
should be con ducted in pri va te and
should be informal in character.
3. Th eir appoint.m ent sho uld be, as far as
poss ible, non-poli t ica l.
4 . Their status should compare with the highest judicial fun ctionaries in the country.
5. They should deal with matters in the
di sc retionary fie ld invo lving ac ts of
injustice, corruption or fa vouriti s m.
6. Their proceed ings sh ould not be subject
to judicia l interferen ce.
7. Th ey should have the maximum latitude
and powers in obtaining information
relevant to their duties.
1'he First ARC of India headed hy Morarji Desai
submitted a special interim reporton the ' Probl ems
or Redrcssal of Citizens' Grievances' in 1966.

~, 509

8. They should not look forward to any be nefit or pecuniary advantage from the
executive government.
The Governmen t of India accepted the recommendation s of ARC in this regard. So far, ten
official attempts have been made to bring about
legislation on this subject. Bills were introdu ced
in the Parlia ment in the following yea rs:
). In May 1968, by the Congress Government
h eaded by Indira Ga ndhi.
2. In April 1971 , aga in by th e Congress
Government headed by Indira Gandhi .
3. In July 1977, by the Janata Government
headed by Morarji Desa i.
4 . In August 1985, b y the Congress
Government h ea ded by Raji v Gandhi.
5. In December 1989, by the Nati on al Front
Government headed by VP Singh .
6 . In September 1996, by the United Front
Government headed by Devc Gowda.
7. In August 1998, by th e BJP·lcd coalition
Government h ea ded by A.S. Vaj payec.
8. In August 2001, by the NDA gove rnm e nt
headed by A.B. Vaj payee.
9. In August 2011, by the UPA government
h eaded by Manmohan Si ngh .
10. In December 2011, by the UPA government headed by Manmoh a n Singh.
The first four bills lapsed due to the dissolution of Lo k Sabha, while th e fifth one was
withdrawn b y the gove rnm e nt. The s ixth and
seventh bill s also lapsed due to the di ssolution
of the lIth and 12th Lok Sabha. Ag<lin, th e
e ighth bill (2001) lapsed due to the di ssolution of the 13th Lok Sabha in 2004. Th e ninth
bill (2011 ) was withdraw11 by the gove rnment.
The tenth bil1 (the Lokpal and Lokayuktas
Bill, 2011 ) was enacted as the Lokpa l and
Lokayuktas Act, 2013.

LOKPAL AND LOKAYUKTAS
ACT (2013)
Features
The sali ent features of th e Lokpa l and Lokayuktas Ac t (2013) arc as foll ows.3
JPress In for mation Bu rea u, Governm ent of India,
December 23, 2013.

510

P'

Indion Polity

I. It seeks to estilb lish the in stituti o n of the
Lokp<l i at the Ccntre and th e Loka y ukt<l
at t he level of t he Sta te <In d thus see ks
to provide a uniform vig ilan ce und
anti-corrup tion ro.:ld map for t he natio n
both .H the Centre a nd ill the Statcs.
The jurisdiction of Lokpal includes the
Prime Minist e r, Mi ni sters, Members
of Parliament and Groups A, B, C and
I) offi ce rs and omcia ls of the Ceillral
Governllle nt .
2. The Lokpa J to co nsist of a Chairperso n
with a ma ximum ofB me mbers of whi ch
50% sha ll be judicia l me mbers.
3. 50% of the mcmbers of the Lokpal sha ll
co me from amongst the SCs, th e S'fs, the
OBCs, minoriti es and women.
4. The selection of th e Ch.lirpcrson and the
membe rs of Lokp,11 shall be through a
Se lect ion Co mmi ttee co nsisting of the
Prime Mini ste r, the Speake r of the Lok
Sab ha , the Leader of t he Opposit io n
in the Lok Sabha, the Chi e f Justice of
India o r a sittin g Supreme Co u rt Judge
no minated by the Chief Justi ce of India
and an emine nt jurist to be nominated
by the President of India o n the bas is
of recommendation s o f the first four
mcmbers of the selectio n com mittee.
5. A Search Co mmitte e will assist th e
Selectio n Com mittee in th e process of
select ion. 50% of the members of the
Search CO lllmittee shall also be from
amo ngst the SCs, th e S1'5, the OBCs,
minorit ies and women.
G. The Pr ime Minister has becn brou ght
under the purview of t he Lokpa l with
s ubject matter exclus io ns and specific
process for handli ng complai nts against
the Prime Min ister.
7. Lokpa J's jurisdiction wil l cover all categori es of public servants, including Group A,
Group B, Group C, and Group D officers
and em ployees ofGovernmcnt. On co mplaints referred to the CVC by the Lokpal,
the CVC wi ll send its repo rt of preliminary o nquiry in res pect of Gro up A
a lld Group B Officers b;! ck to t he Lokpal

fo r further dec is io n. With respect to categories of cmp loyees from Gro up C and
Group D, the CVC wi ll proceed further
in exercise of its own powers under the
CVC Act subj ect to reporting and review
by th e Lokpal.
8 . The LokpaJ will have the powe r of superintendence and direc tion ovc r (lilY
in vestigating age ncy, in cludi ng the CBt ,
for cases refe rred to thcm by the Lokpal.
9. A High-Powe red Co mmittee c haired by
the Prim e Mini stcr will recommend the
se lection of the Directo r of CBI.
10. It inco rporates provis ions for atta chment
find co nfi scat ion of p ro perty of puhli c
scrvants a cquired by co rrupt m ea ns,
eve n whil e th e prosec lltion is pending.
11 . It lays down cleM timelin es. For preliminary en qui ry, it is three mo nt hs extendable by three mont hs. For investi gat ion ,
it is six months which may be extended
by six m onths at a time. For trial, it is
one year ex ten dable by one year ,lIld to
achieve t hi s, special courts to be set up .
12. It enhances maxi mulll punishmen t under
the Prevention of Co rruption Act from
seven years to ten yea rs. The minimum
puni shm ent under section s 7, 8, 9 and 12
of th e Prevention of Co rrup tion Act will
now he three ),C'H S, a nd the minimum
pu n ishm en t u nder section IS (pu ni shme nt for atte mpt) wi ll now be two yea rs.
13. Institutions whi c h are finan ced full y or
part ly by Gover nm e nt are under the
j urisdiction of Lo kp.il, but institution s
aided by Government arc excluded.
14. It provides adequate protection for honest
and uprigh t publ ic se rva nts.
15. Lokpa l conferred with power to g rant
sa nction fo r prosecut io n of public se rvants in place of the Government or
competent authorit y.
J 6. It contains a number ofpro"isions aimed
<It strengthening the CBI sll ch as:
( i) setti ng up of a Directorate of Prosec ution hea d ed by " Director
of Prosec utio n under the overall
co nt ro l of th e Director of CBI;

Lokpol and Lokoyuktas

(ii) appointment of the Director of Pro-

secution on the recommendation
of the CVC;
(iii) maintenance ofa panel of advocates
by CBI other than Governm ent
a dvocates with the co nse nt o f
the Lokpal for ha ndling Lokpalreferred cases;
(iv) transfer of officers ofCm investigating cases referred by LokpaJ with
the approval of Lokpal;
(v) provision of adequate funds to CBI
for investigating cases referred by
Lokpal.
17. All entities receiving donations from foreign SOUTce in the contex t of the Foreign
Contribution Regulatio n Act (FC RA ) in
excess of ~10 lakhs per yea r are brought
under the jurisdiction of Lokpal.
16. It contain s a mandate for setting up
of the in stitution of Lokayukta through
enactment of a law by the State Legislature
within a period of 365 days from the
date of commencement of this Act. Thus,
the Act provides freedom to the states to
decide upon the contours of the Lokayukta
mechanism in their respective states.

Drawbacks
The following are the drawbacks (shortcomings) of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 4 :
1 . Lokpal ca nnot suo motu proceed against
any public servant.
2. Emphasis on form of complaint rather
than substance.
3. Heavy punishment for false and frivolous
co mpl ai nts against public servants may
detcr complaints being fil ed to Lokpal.
4. Anonymous complaints not allowed Can't just make a complaint on plain
paper and drop it in a box with supporting documents.
5. Legal assistance to public servant against
whom complaint is filed.
'T.Ixmann's Gu.ide l ~o Lokpa \ and Lokayuktas Act
2013, pp. 1-9 to I-II.

~ 511

6. Limitation period of 7 years to fi le
complaints.
7. Very non-transparent procedure for dealing with complaints against the PM.

t LOKAYUKTAS
Even much before the enactment of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act (201 3) itself, many
states had already set up the institutio n of
Lokayuktas.
It must be noted here that the instituti on of
lokayukta was estabhshed first in Maharashtra
in 1971. However, Odisha had passed the Act
in this regard in 1970.
The va riou s aspects of the institution of
lokayukta are:
I . The structure of the lokayukta is n ot sa me
in all the states. Some states have created
the lokayukta as well as upalokayukta,
while some others have crea ted only the
lokay ukta .
2. The 10kay ukta and upalokayukta are
appointed by the governor of the state.
3. Judicial qualification s are prescribed for
the lokayukta in so me states. But no
specific qualificati ons are prescribed in
other states.
4. In most of the states, the term of office
fixed for lokayukta is of 5 years duration
or 65 yea rs of age, whichever is ea rlier.
5. There is no uniformity rega rding the
jurisdi ct ion of lokay ukta in all the
states. The following points can be noted
in this rega rd:
(a) The chief mini st er is included
within the jurisdiction of lokayukta
in so me states, while he /sh e is
excluded from the purview of lokayukta in other states.
(b) Ministers and higher civil servants
are included in the purview of 10kayukta in almost all the states.
(c) Members of state legislatures are
included in the purview oflokayukta
in some states.
(d) 'J}},9 1'''H.tf.W,Jii,~\~,N :Kt;..f(:I I~l bodtf1S.
corporations, Companies'and societjes

512

P

Indian Polity

are included in the jurisdiction of the
lokayukta in most of the states.
6. In most of the states, the lokayukta ca n
initiate investiga tions e ither on the
bas is of a com plaint rece ived from the
citize n against unfair admini stra ti ve
action or suo moto.
7. The lokayukta can consider the cases
of 'grievances' as well as 'allegations'
in some states. But, in other states,
the job of lokayuktas is confined to

investigating al1 cgations (co rruption )
and not grievances (maladmLnistmtion).
8. The lokayukta presents, annually, to
the governor of the state a conso lidated
report on his/ her performan<:e. The
governor places this report along with
an explanatory memorandum before the
state legislature.
9. The recommendations made by the loka·
yukta are only advisory and not binding
on the state government.

I

.========================~~~:======-~------~

67

National Investigation
Agency

t ESTABLISHMENT
The National Investiga tion Agency (NIA) was
con stituted in 2009 unde r the provision s of
th e National In vestigation Agency Act, 2008
(N IA Act). It is the centra l counte r-terro ri sm
law enforcement agency in the country.
The NIA was establish ed in the backdrop
of the 2008 Mumbai terror attacks, popularl y
known as the 26/11 incide nt. This national
horror led to the realisatio n of the n eed for
a separate fed eral agen cy to deal with terroTrelated crimes in the country.
The headquarters of the NIA is in New
Delhi. T he branch offices of the NIA arc
located in different states of India. In a ddition, t he NIA ha s a separate specialised cell
known as TFFC .Cell dealing with the subjects
of fa ke curren cy notes and terror funding.
The NlA is headed by a Director-GeneraL
He/ she is appointed by the central government.
Hislher powers are similar to the powers exercig..
able by a Director-General of Police in respect
of the police force in a state.
Th e NIA works under t h e administrative
control of the Ministry of Home Affairs,
Government of India. Th e state governme nt
extends all assistance-and co·opera tion to the
N lA for investigation of t he offences specified
under the NIA Act.

~ RATIONALE
Whil e introducing the NIA Bill , 2008, in the
Parlia m ent, th e .Gover nm ent of India gave
the following reason s fo r creat ing the NIA :
1. Over the past several years, India ha s
been the victim ofla rge·sca le te rrori sm

spon sore d from ac ro ss the borders.
The re have been innum erable incide n ts
of terrorist attacks, not only in the mili·
tancy and insurgency affected a reas a nd
areas affected by left·wing ex t remism,
but also in the form of te rrorist attacks
and bomb blasts, e tc., in va rious parts
of the hinterla nd and major cities, etc.
2 . A large number of su ch incidents are
fou nd to have complex inter-state and
international linkages , and po ss ibl e
co nnection 'w ith other activities like the
smuggling of a rms a nd drugs, pushing in
and ci rcul ation of fake Indian curre ncy,
infiltration from across the borders, etc.
3. Keep ing all th ese in view, it was fe lt
that the re was a need for setting up of
an agen cy at the central level for th e
investigation of offences related to terrorism and certa in oth er Acts, whi ch
have nation a l ramifications.
4. Several expert committees and the Second
Administrative Reforms Commi ssion of
Indi a I have also made reco mm e ndations
for establi shing such a n agency.

~ FUNCTIONS
The NIA is mandated to investigate and prose·
cute offences under the various Acts mentioned
in the Schedule of the N lA Act. In pursuance
of its mandate, the NlA collects, coUates and
a n a lyses coun te r·terrorism investigation. It
a lso sh ares inputs with its sister inte llige nce
ITbe Second Administrative Reforms Commission

of India (Chairm an: Veerappa Maily), 2005-09, in
its report entitl ed 'Combati ng Terrori sm' (2008).

514

,i!'

Indian Polity

agencies and law e nforcem e n t units both at
centra l and state governm e nts level.
In more detail, th e fu nctio n s a ssigned to
the NIA are as fo llows2 :
(a) 1b in vesti gate and prose cute offences
in respect of the Acts specified in the
Schedule of the NIA Act.
(b) To provide assista n ce to, and see k ass istance from, ot h e r j nt ellige nc e and
in vest igation agenc ies of t he centra l
government a nd sLate governm e nts.
(e) 1b take other such measures wh ich may
be necessary for speedy and effecti ve
impleme n tation of th e provi sion s of the
NlA Ac t.

~ VISION
Th e followi ng points highlight the vis io n of
the NlA 3 :
I. The NlA aim s to be a thorough ly professional in vestigative agen cy ma tching the
best international standards.
2. The NIA aims to set the standards of c.xcelle n ce in coun ter-te rrori sm a nd other
national security- related investigat ion s
at the national level by developing into
a hi ghly trained, pa rtnershi p-orien ted
workforce.
3. Th e NJA aim s at c reating dete rren ce for
exi sting and pote ntial terrori st groups!
indi vidu a ls.
4. The NIA a im s to develop a s a storehouse
of a ll te rrorist-re la ted informat ion.

~ MISSION
Th e mi ss ion of th e NlA is as fo ll ows 4 :
1. In-depth profess ion a l inves tigation of
schedul ed offe nces using th e latest scientifi c methods of in vestigation and setting
up such sL:1.ndards as to ensure that a IJ
cases entrustcd to the Nlf\ are de tected .
2-rhe National Investigatio n Age ncy (Ma nner of

Constitution) Rules, 2008.
lorhis information is obtai ned from the official website
of the National In vestigation Agency, Government

oflndia.
-Ilbid.

2. En suring effecti vc and speedy t ria l.
3. Develop in g in to a thoroughly profess ional , r esult-oriented organisa tion,
u pholdin g the Con stitution of India and
laws of the land , gi ving prime importance to t he protection of hu ma n rights
and dignity of the ind ividual.
4. Developing a profess ional workfo rce
thro ugh regul ar train ing and exposure
to the best pra ctices and pro cedures.
5. Displaying scienti fi c temper and progressive spirit whi le d isc ha rgi ng th e duties
a ss igned.
6. Inducting modem methods a nd t he la test
tec hno logy in every sphere of a ct ivities
of the agen cy.
7. Ma i.ntain in g professiona l and cordial Tela··
tions with the governme n ts of states and
un ion territo ries a nd other law e nfo rce·
ment age nc ies in comp liance with the
legal provis ions of th e NIA Act.
8. Assisting a ll states a nd other in vestigating agencies i n investigatio n of terrori st
cases.
9. Bu ildin g a database o n a ll te rror ist·
related inform at ion and shaTing th e
ava ila ble database with the states an d
other age nc ies.
10. Study in g a nd ana lysing laws relati ng to
te rrori sm in other co untries and regula rl y eva luating the a dequacy of e.'X isting
laws i n In dia and proposing changes as
an d when necessary.
II. Winni ng the confiden ce of the citizens
of Ind ia through selfless an e fea rless
end eavours.

t JURISDICTION
The NIA has concu r rent jurisdiction to investigate a nd prosecute th e offen ces affecting the
sove re ignty, security and integrity of India ,
sec urity of state, frie nd.l y relation s wi th fore ign states and offences under various Acts
e nacted to impl ement internationa l treaties,
agre ements, conventions and resolutions of
the UNO, its agenc ies a nd other in ternational
orga ni sation s.

1

NotionollnvestigotionAgency ~ 515
The NIA is empowered to probe terror
attacks including bomb blasts, hijacking of
aircrafts and ships, attacks on nuclear installations and use of weapons of mass destruction.
In 2019, the jurisdiction of the NIA ~vas
extended 5 , Consequently, the NIA is also
empowered to probe the offences relating to
human trafficking, counterfeit currency or
bank notes, manufacture or sale of prohibited
arms, cyber-terrorism and explosive substances.

t NIA (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2019

The various features or provisions of the
amendment arc as fol1ows 6 :
1. It applied the provisions of the NIA Act
also to persons who commit a scheduled
3yide the NIA (Amendment) Act, 2019.
6 Based on the Statement of Objects and lteasons
appended to the NIA (Amendment) Bm, 2019.

offence beyond Ihdia against Indian citi ..
zens or affecting the interest of India.
2. It provided that the officers of the NIA
shall have the similar powers, duties,
privies and liabilities being exercised by
the police officers in connection with
the investigation of offences, nol ortly
in India but also outside: India.
3. It empowered the certtral government
with respect to a scheduled offence com·
mitted outside Iridia . to direct the NJA to
register the case and take up investiga ..
tion as if such offence has taken place
in India.
4. It provided that the central govetrtrttertt
and the state governt1ients may designate SesSions Courts as: Special Co utts
for conducting the trial of offences
under the NIA Act.
5. It inserted certain new offences in the
Schedule of the NIA Act.
j

--------------------------------------------------------------~--~----~.

Scan the QR Code to access the conceptual video on Discussion of
CAG, AGI, CBI and NlA - their auton omy and limitations
and other important topics ort EDGE

,_

-

,

_

... _0 • • •

,.'

CHAPTER

68

LESTABLISHMENT
T he Gove rnm e n t of India, recogni s in g t he
impo rta nce of d isaste r ma na ge m e nt as a
na tio na l prior ity, had set up a High Powe red
Committee in 1999 a nd a Natio na l Committee
in 2001 afte r t he Guj a ra t eart h quake, to
make reco m me ndatio ns o n t he pre pa rat io n
of d isaste r ma nage me nt pl a n s a nd suggest
effective m it igat io n mecha n is ms. Howeve r,
after th e Ind ian Ocea n tsu na m i of 2004, th e
Gove rn me n t of In d ia too k a defining step
in th e legislative h isto ry of th e coun try by
1
e nac ting the Di saste r Ma nage me n t Act, 2005 ,
The Act provi ded for the crea tion of the
Nati o nal Disas ter Mana ge me nt Authority
(N DMA) to spea rh ead a nd implement a holi s·
ti c and integrated a pproach to di saster ma n·
a ge men t i n th e coun try. Initi a ll y, the NOMA
wa s constituted in 2005 by a n Executive Orde r
of the Governm e nt of Indi a. Subsequently, the
NOMA wa s notifie d ill 2006 unde r the p rovisio ns of t he Act 2,
The NOMA co n sists of a ch ai rperso n a nd
ot her me mbe rs, not exceedin g nine. T h e
Pr ime Mi n iste r is th e ex -offi cio cha irpe rson
of the NOMA. T he othe r me mbe rs a re no m ina ted by the c hairpe rso n of the NOMA. Th e
cha irpe rso n of the NOMA des igna tes o ne of
th e me mbe rs as th e vice-cha irpe rson of the
NDMA. T he vice-c ha irpe rso n has the status of
a Cabin e t Minister whil e the ot he r membe rs
have the statu s o f a Ministe r of State.
I Annual Report 2020-21, Na ti ona l Disaster

Manage-

me nt Auth ority, Gove rnm e nt of India, p. 2.
2l b id.

National Disaster
Management
Authority
The NDMA is the apex body for disaster
ma nagemen t in th e cou ntry. It wo rks unde r the
adm inistra tive contro l of the Un ion Ministry of
Home Affa irs.
T he NOMA \V<I S establ ished with t hi s vision :
'1b build a safe r a nd d isa ster resi l ie n t Ind ia
by a holi sti c, p ro-a ctive, tec hn ology driven
a nd susta in able develo p men t strategy tha t
i nvo lves a ll stakeholde rs an d fosters a culture
of p reve n tion, preparedn ess a nd mit iga tion '.

LOBJECTIVES
The obj ecti ves of the NOM A are as foll ows 3:
1. 1b prom ote a culture of preve n ti on, preparedn ess and res ilien ce a t all levels
th rou gh kno wle dge, innovation a n d
edu cati o n .
2. lb e nco urage mi tigati o n measures based
on techno logy, trad itio nal wi sdom a nd
e nviro nme nta l susta in abili ty.
3. 1b ma instrea m disaster ma nageme nt into
th e deve lopm e n tal pl a nning process.
4. 1b establish inst itutional a nd techno-legal
fra meworks to create a n e nabling regulatory e nviro nme nt a nd a co mpl ia n ce
regime.
5. 1b e n sure a n efficie nt mec ha ni sm fo r
ide n tifi ca tion, assessm e nt a nd mon ito rin g of disaster ri sks.
6. 1b deve lop co nte mpo ra ry fore casti n g
a nd early warning systems backed by
res po nsive a nd fa il sa fe communi cation
with inform a tion technology support.
Jrbid, p. 6.

National Disaster Management Authority
7. 1b ensure efficient response and relief
with a caring approach towards the needs
of the vulnerable sections of the society.
8. Th undertake reconstruction as an oppor·
tunity to build disaster resilient structures
and habitat for ensuring safer living.
9 . Th promote a productive and proactive
partnership with the media for disaster
management.

t FUNCTIONS

The NOMA has the responsibility for laying
down the policies, plans and guidelines for
disaster management for ensuring timely and
effective response to disaster.
The functions of the NOMA are as follows:
1. To lay down policies on disaster
management.
2. 1b approve the Nationa l Plan.
3. 1b approve plans prepared by the Min istries or Departments of the Government
of India in accordance with the National
Plan.
4. 'Ib lay down guidelines to be followed by
the State Disaster Management Authorities
(SDMAs)4 in drawing up the State Plan.
5. 1b lay down guidelines to be followed by
the different Ministries or Departments
of the Government of India for the purpose of integrating the measures for
prevention of disaster or the mitigation
of its effects in their development plans
and projects.
6. 1b coordinate the enforcement and impl ementation of the policy and plan for
disaster management.
7. 1b recommend provision of funds for (he
purpose of mitigation.
8. 1b provide such support to other countries
affected by major disasters as may be
determined by the central government.
9. 1b take other such measures for the prevention of disaster, or the mitigation, or
preparedness and capacity building for
4The Act also provided for the establishment of the
State Disaster Management Authorities and the
District Disaster Management Authorities.

~ 517

dealing with the threatening disaster
situation or disaster as it may consider
necessary.
10. 1b lay down broad policies and guidelines for the functioning of the Nationa l
Institute of Disaster Managements.

t ADDITIONAL FUNCTIONS

In addition to the above, the NDMA also performs the following functions:
1. It recommends guidelines for the minimum standards of relief to be provided
to persons affected by disaster.
2 . It recommends, in cases of disasters of
severe magnitude, relief in repayment of
loans or grant of fresh loans on concessional terms to the persons affected by
such disasters.
3 . It exercises the general superintendence,
direction and control of the Natio nal
Disaster Response Force (NDRF). This
force has been constituted for the purpose of specialist response to a threatening disaster situation or disaster.
4 . It authorises the concerned department
or authority to make the emergency procurement of provisions or materials for
rescue or relief in any threatening disaster situation or disaster. Tn such cases, the
standard procedure requiring inviting of
tenders is deemed to be waived.
5. It prepares an annua l report on its
activities and submits it to the centra l
government. The central government
causes it to be laid before both Houses
of Parliament.

STATE DISASTER MANAGEMENT
AUTHORITY
Under the Disaster Management Act, 2005,
every state government should establish a State
Disaster Management Authority (SOMA) for
the state.
s-rhe National Institute of Di&"lster Management is
located in New Delhi.

i

1,
518

Indion Polity

Composition
An SOMA co ns ists of a chairperso n and ot her
members, not exceedin g nine. The Chief
Ministe r of the state is t he ex-officio chairpe rson of the SOMA. T he cha irpe rson of the State
Execut ive CO lllmittee is t he ex-offic io member
of th e SOMA. The o th e r membe rs, 11 0 t exceeding eight, afC nom in <l tcd by th e chairpe rson
of the SOMA. Th e ch airperson of the SOM A
des ig-Ilatcs one o r the me mbers as the vicechilirpc rson of the SOM A. Th e cha irperson
of the State Executi ve Co mmittee acts as the
ex-o fficio chi ef execllli ve offi ce r of the SOMA.

Functions
I\ n SDMA ha s the respo ns ibili ty for layi ng
down poli c ies a nd plans fo r di saste r management in the state. Its fu n ction s incl ude th e
fo ll owi ng:
I . 1'b I<lY down t he state di sa ster management po li cy.
2. 'Ib approve the State Pla n in acco rd~ln ce
with the guide l ines lai d down by the
NDMA.
3 . To approve th e di saste r man ;.lge m c nt

pl a ns pre pared by t he de partm en ts of
t he gove rnm e nt of th e state.
4. 1b l ay down guidelin es to be fo ll owed by
th e de partlll e nts of the gover nm e n t of
the sta te for th e purpo ses of integrat ion of measures for t he preve n tion of
ciiS.lste rs a nd mit igat ion in their deve lo pm e n t pla ns and projects a nd provide
neceSSil ry tech n ica I assista nce thereof.
5 . 11.> coordinate the imple me n tation of the
State Pl a n .
6 . 11.> reco mm end the prov ision offunds for
mitigation a nd preparedness meas ures.
7. 10 rev iew the development plans of the
different de pilrtm e n ts of th e state Hnd
en sure that prevention and mitigat io n
measures are integrated th ere in .
8. 10 review th e meas ures be in g taken fo r
mi tigation , capac ity bui ldin g and preparedn ess by th e depart me nts of th e
gove rnm e nt of t he state and iss ue suc h
gui de lin es as may be necessary.

9. Th prepare an annual report on its act ivities a nd su bmit it to the state governme nt. The state govern me nt ca uses i t to
6
be lai d befo re the state leg islatu re ,

DISTRICT DISASTER
MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
Un der the Disaste r Ma nagement Act, 2005,
eve ry state gove rnment should estHblish a Distr ict Di saster Ma nil gemc nt' Authority ( DDlII'I A)
for eve ry d ist r ict in t he state.

Composition
A DDMA co nsists of a chairperson and other

members, not exceeding seve n. The Collecto r (or
District Magistmte o r Deputy Co mmission e r)
of the d istrict is t he cx~offic io chairperso n of
the DOMA. The elected representative of the
loca l authority is t he ex-officio co-chairperso n
of t he DDMA. But, in case of Tribal Areas (as
refe rred to in the Sixth Schedul e to the Co nstitution of Ind ia), the c hi ef executive member
of the d istri ct co unci l of a utonomou s distric t
is the ex-offic io co-cha irperso n of th e DDMA.
The chi e f executi ve office r of the DDMA, lhe
supe rin tende nt of pol ice and the c hi ef medica l
offi ce r of the di strict Cl re the ex-offic io me mbers of the DDMA . No t 1110re tha n two oth e r
di strict level off-icers arc Hppo imeci by the stiltc
gove rnm e nt as th e me mbe rs of the DDMA. rn
case of a di stri ct whe re Zilla Parishad exists,
the chairpe rso n of that Zilla Parishad is th e
co-chairpe rso n of the DDMA. The ch ief e.xecutive officer of the DOMA is appointed by lhe
Stell e governme nt.

Functions
c
Th e ODMA a c ts as the district p lannin 0'
coordin at in g an d impl e m e nting body fo r
di saster manage ment ilnd takes an measures
for th e purposes of di saste r mananc
o mcnt in
th e distri ct in accordance with the guidel ines
6 Before cHch HOLlse of the state legisla ture where it

co nsists of twO Ho uses, or where such leg isla ture
consists of onc I-lo use, before that 1·lousc.

Notional Disaster Management Authority

--,;,

~

laid down by the NDMA and the SDMA. Its
functions are as fo ll ows:
1. 10 prepare a disaster management p lan
including district response plan for the
district.
Z. 1b "Coordinate and monitor the implementation of the National Policy, State Policy,
National Plan, State Plan and District Plan.
3. Th ensure that the areas in the district
vulnerable to disasters are identified and
measures for the prevention of disasters
and the mitigation of its effects are
undertaken by the departments of the
government at the district 1evel as well
as by the local authorities.
4. Th ensure that the guidelines for prevention of disasters, mitigation of its effects,
preparedness and response measures as
laid down by the NDMA and the SOMA
are followed by all departments of the
government at the district level and the
local authorities in the district.
5. Th organise and coordinate specialised
training programmes for different levels
of officers, employees and voluntary
rescue workers in the district.

519

6. 'Ib facilitate community training and
awareness programmes for prevention of
disaster or mitigation with the support
of local authorities, governmental and
non-governme n tal organisations.
7. 10 set up, maintain, review and upgrade
the mechanism for early warnings and
dissemination of proper information to
the public.
8. 10 advise, assist and coordinate the
activities of the departments of the
government at the district level, statutory bodies and other governmental
and non -governmental organisations
in the district engaged ' in disaster
management.
9. Th identify buildings and places which
could, in the event of any threatening
disaster situation or disaster, be used
as relief centres or camps and make
arrangements for water supply and sanitation in such buildings or places.
10. 1b perform such other functions as the
state government or SDMA may assign
to it or as it deems necessary for disaster
management in the District.

.-,

CHAPT.ER

69 Bar Council of India

t ESTABLISHMENT

t COMPOSITION

The Bar Co un cil of India (BC I) wa s estab1ished unde r a leg islatio n e n acted by the
Pa rli ame nt, namely, the Advocates Act, 1961.
Hen ce, it is a statuto r y (and n ot a co nstitutio n a l) body.
In 19 5 1, th e Gover nm e nt of Indi a
appointed a n All India Bar Comm ittee un der
th e c hairmanship of Justice S.R. Das of the
Supreme Co urt. T he m a nd ate of t he commit-

The BCI co nsists of the elected members as well
as the ex-officio me mbers. They are as follows:
1. One member e lected by each SBC fro m
a m ongst its members.
2. The Attorney-General of Ind ia and the
So li ci tor-Ge neral of India arc the exoffic io members.
Th e BCI shall have a Chairman and a ViceCha ir man. They a re elected by t he Council
from amongst its members. They hold office
for a period of two yea rs.
T he term of o ffi ce of a member of the BC I,
e lected by a SBC, shall be for the period for
which hel she ho lds officc as a member of that
SBC.
The BC I cons i sts of the fol l owing
co mmittees:
(i) Di scip lin ary Co mmittee (o ne o r more)
( ii) Legal Aid Co mmittee (one o r more)
(iii) ExecUlive Co mmi ttee
( iv) Legal Educat io n Co mmi ttee
(v) Other Co mmittees ( if necessa ry)

tee was to exam ine and re port on the issue

of re-organi sation of th e Bar and legal profes sio n in the co un try. The co mmi ttee submitted its report in 1953. It recomme nded,
inter alia , the establ ishm ent of a n All Ind ia
Bar Cou nc il a nd State Bar Co un cil s (SBCs) to
regulate legal profess ion at the national and
s tate level.
Later, in 1958, the Law Co mmi ss io n of
India l aga in repeated and endorsed the above
recommendatio n of the Das Com mittee. Co nsequently, the Advoca tes Act, 196 1 was pa ssed
by Lhe Parliament to provide for, inter alia,
the creation of the BC I and SBCs.
The BCI is a n a uto no mous body. It works
under the Departmcnt of Legal Affairs of the
Un ion Ministry of Law and Justice 2•
Ifourteenth Report on the subject of Reform of

Judicial Administration.
1'hc Union Min istry of Law and Justice comprises
of three depanments, namely. the Depanment of
Lega l Affa irs, the Department of Justice, and the
Legislative Dc p<l rtmcnt.

t FUNCTIONS
T he functio ns of the BC I are as fo ll ows:
1 . To lay d own sta ndards of profession al
co ndu ct and etiq ue tte for advocates
2. 1b lay down the procedure to be fo llowed
by its disciplinary co mmi ttee and the
disciplinary co mm ittee of eac h SBC
3. 1b safeguard the rights, privileges, and
interests of advocates

Bar Council of Indio

4. 1b promote and support law refo rm
5. 1b dea l with an d dispose of any matte r
which is referred to it by a SBC
6. 1b exercise gen eral supervision a nd co n·
trol over SBCs
7. 1b prom ote lega l education a nd to lay
down sta ndards of lega l education in
co n sultat ion wi th the Universiti es in
India imparting lega l education and the

S8Gs

B. 1b recognise universities whose degree
in law shall b e a qualification for
e nrolm e nt as a n advocate and for th a t
purpose to visit and in spect uni vers i·
ties. The BCI ca n a lso ca use the SBCs
to visit a nd insp ect unive r siti es in
accorda n ce with the directions issued
by it
9. 'Ib co ndu ct se mina rs a nd organi se talks
on lega l topics by emi n e nt jurists and
publish journals and pa pe rs of lega l
interest
10. 1b orga ni se legal a id to the poor people
11 . 1b recogni se (on a reciprocal baSi s) for·
e ign qua lifi cation s in law obtained outside Indi a for the purpose of admission
as an advocate under thi s Act
12. 1b m a nage and invest its funds
13. 1b provide for the election of its members.
14. 1b perform all other functions conferred
on it unde r this Act
15. 1b do all oth er things n ecessary for disch arging the above functions.
The BCl may establish funds for the followtng purposes:
(a) Giving fin a ncial assistance to organize
welfare schemes for indigent, disabled
or other a dvocates
(b) Giving legal aid or advice
(c) Establishing law libraries
Further, th e BCl may al so receive grants,
don ation s, gifts, and ben e faction s for the
above purposes.
The BCl ca n become a membe r of international1egal bodies such as the International
Bar Association or the International Lega l
Aid Association.

~ 521

~ STATE BAR COUNCILS

II IEstablishment
T h e Advocates Act, 1961 provides for the
estab li shm ent of a SBC for each state or a
co mm on SSC for two or more states or for a
state a nd a union territory.
At prese nt, there a re 24 SBCs. The nam e
an d the jurisdiction of all the 24 SSCs are
me ntio n ed in Thble 69,1.

fl iComposit ion
Any State Bar Cou nc il con sists of the e lected
me mbers as well as the ex-officio membe rs,
This is ex pla in ed below:
1. In the case of a SSC with an e lecto rate of
five thousand - 15 me mbersj in the case
of a SBC with a n e lectorate of fi ve to ten
thousand - 20 me mbersj a nd in the case
of SBC with an electorate of more than
ten t housan d - 25 members. They are
e lected in accordance wi th the system
of p roportiona l re presentation by mea ns
of the s ingl e tran sfe rable vote from
a mo ngst advocates on the electoral roll
of the SBC. But, one-half of such elected
me mbe rs shall be persons who have for
ten years been advocates on a state roll.
2. In case of any SSC, the Advocate-General
of the state is the ex-offi cio membe r.
Si mila rly, in case of a co mmon SSC, the
Advocate-General of each of the states
is the ex·offic io member. Further, in
case of the SBC of Delhi, the Additional
Solicitor·General of India is the exofficio me mbe r.
Each SSC sha ll have a Chairman and a
Vice·Chairman. They are elected by the Coun·
cil a mongst its m e mbers.
The term of office of a n elected membe r
of any SBC is five years. But, if any SSC fails
to prov ide for the election of its members
before the ex piry of sa id te rm, then the BCI
may exte nd th e sa id term for a period of
six months.

522

Ind;on Polity

A State Bar Council consists of the following co mmittees:
(i) Disciplinary Co mmittee (one or more)
( ii) Lega l Aid Co mmittee (one or morc)
( iii) Executi ve Comm ittee
(iv) Enro lm ent Com mittee
(v) Ot her Co mmi ttees ( if necessary).

II IFunctions
The functions of a State Bar Cou nc il arc as
follows:
1. 1b admit perso ns as advoca tes on its roll
2. 'Tb prepare and mai ntai n such roll
3. 1b entertain and determine cases of misco ndu ct agai nst advocates on its roll
4. 1b safeguard the rights, privileges, and
inte rests of advocates on its roll
5. 1b promote the growt h of Bar Associat ions for the purposes of effective
impleme ntati on of the we lfare sche mes
for the indi ge nt , disabled or other
advocates
6. 1b promote and support law reform
7. 1b con du ct se m inars a nd organise talks
on legal topics by e minent jurists and
publish journals a nd papers of legal
interest
8. 1b o rganise legal aid to the poor
9. 1b manage and invest its funds
10. Th provide tbrthe e lection of its members
II. 1b vi sit and inspect un ivers ities in accordance with the direct ions issued by the
Bel

12. 1b perform all other functions conferred
on it under th is Act
] 3. 1b do a ll other things n ecessa ry for di scharging t he above functions
A SHC may establish fund s for the fo ll owing
purposes:
(a) Giving financia l assistance to organise
welfare schem es for the indigent, disabled or other advocates
(b) Givi ng lega l aid or advice
(c) Establish ing law libraries
Further, a SBC may a lso receive gra nts, donatio ns, gifts a nd benefactions for the above
purposes.

t TYPES OF ADVOCATES"
The Advocates Ac t, 1961 provides for two categories of Advocates viz., Senior Advocates
and other advoca te s, who are entitled to
pra ctice law before the Co urts. The exercise
of powers vested in the Supreme Co urt and
the High Courts to dcsignate an Advocate
as a Se nior Advocate is c ircumscr ibed by
the req uirement of du e sat isfact ion that the
Advocate concerned fulfills the qualification s
prescr ibed under the Advocates Act, 1961. In
terms of the Advocates Act, 1961, a n advocate
may, with h is/ he r co n sent, be designated as
senio r advocate if the Supre me Co urt or a
High Court is of opinion that by virtue of
hi s/ her abil ity standi ng at the Bar or spec ial
knowledge or experie nce in law, h e/she is
desc rving of suc h distinction.
The re are three categories of Advocates who
arc entitled to practise law before the Supreme
Court. These are explained as follows:

D ISenior Advocate
A 'Sen ior Advocate' mean s ,lOy advocate so
deSignated under the Advocates Act, 1961, and
all such advocates whose names werc born e on
the roll of the senior advocates of the Cou rt
immediately before the co mm encement of the
Advocates Act, 1961. Tlle Supreme Court Rules,
2013, deal s with des ignat ion of Advocates as
Se nior Advocates. These Rules provide that
the Chi ef Justi ce of Indi a and the Judges may,
with the conse nt of the Advocate, designate
an Advocate as Sen ior AdvoCc1te, if in t he ir
op in ion, by virtue of his/ her ab ili ty, sta nding
at the Bar or special knowledge or experien ce
in law, the said Advocme is deserving of such
distin ct ion . Apart from the designation of
Advocates as Se nior Advocates, retired Chief
Ju stices/J udges of the High Co urts are a lso
considered for designation as Se ni or Advocates
in the Supre me Co urt. A Se ni or Advocate is
Z,' lndian Judi ciary: Annua l Re port 202 1-22, Th e
Supreme COlirt of Ind i ~l , pp. 107- 109.

Sor Council of Indio
n ot e nti tled to a ppea r in the Suprem e Cou rt
with out an Advoca te-o n-Record .
A Perm ane n t Co mmittee has b ee n con stituted by the Chief Justice of Indi a to deal wi th
all ma tters re lating to des ig nation of Se nior
Advocates in th e Supre m e Co urt. Th e compositio n of the Co m mittee is as unde r: (a) Ch ie f
Ju stice of India-Cha irpe rso n ; (b) 'fWo se ni o rm ost Judges o f the Suprem e Court-Me mbers;
(c) Attorn ey Gen era l fo r Indi a-Me mber; a nd
(d) A member of th e Bar as n omin ated by the
Ch a irperson and Members of this Committee.

fl iAdvocate-on-Record
An 'Advocate-on -Record ' m ea ns an ad voca te,
wh o is en t it1 ed unde r the Supre m e Court
Rul es, 20] 3 to act as well as to pl ead for a
pa rty in the Supre m e Co u rt. No Advocate
other tha n a n Advocate-a n -Record is c n t it led
to fil c an a ppea ran ce or act for a party in the
Suprem e Court.
T he Suprem e Court a t the tim e of its in ception in 1950 inherited the jurisdi ction of th e
Fede ral Cou rt and the Pr ivy Cou nci l. T h e
Rul es preva lent in th e Federa l Court we re
continued in the beg innin g. Th e Practice
and Procedure of t he Sup re m e Co urt h as
u nde rgon e enorm ou s ch a n ges ever s ince.
Ori ginally, the Rul es of the Suprem e Court
(as th e n ado pted) recogn ized the syste m of
"Age nts". The Pract ice a nd Procedu re was
substantially modifi ed in th e yea r 1954 and
"Advoca tes-o n -Record" re pl aced th e system of

Table 69.1
SI No

~ 523

~A ge n ts". When introduced in 1954, a pa rt fro m

th e then reg iste red "A ge nts~, an Advo cate
of seven yea rs sta nding was e n t itl ed to get
himselflh erse1f reg iste red as an 'Ad\'ocate-o n Record ', provided h e/ sh e ful filled th e condi tio ns p r escribed .
In 1959, the Ru les were a m ended, introdu ci ng th e 'Advoca te-a n-Reco rd' exa minati o n
condu cted by the Suprem e Court. Th e Registry o f th e Supreme Court conducts Advocatcon-Record Examination pe riodi ca ll y wi t h
approval of the Examination Committee and
unde r th e superv is ion of Secretary, Board of
Exa min ers, a ppointed by the Chi ef Justice of
India. Th e exa minatio n maintain s high standa rds to en sure that best of the tal ent com e in
as Advocate-on-Record . A Regulatio n pertain ing to the examinatio n states that no Advoca te
shall be eli gible to a ppear in the exa minatio n
unl ess he/ sh e ha s received tra inin g from a n
Advocate-on-Record of not less tha n te n years
sta ndin g for a con ti nu ous period of one year
comm en ci n g from the end o f the fou rth yea r
of date o f hi s/her enrolm e nt.

II IOther Advocates
These a re Advoca tes whose na m es a re e n te red
on th e roll of a ny State Bar Cou nc il m a inta in ed unde r the Advocates Act, 1961. Th ey
ca nn ot appear, pl ead a nd address th e Court
in a ny m atter o n beh alf of a pa rty in th e
Supreme Court unl ess in stru cted by an Advoca te-o n-Record or permitted by the Court.

Name and Jurisdiction of State Bar Counci ls
Name

States & UTs Covered

1.

Bar Council of Andhra Pradesh

Andhra Pradesh

2.

Bar Council of Bihar

Bihar

3.

Bar Council of Gujarat

Gujarat

4.

Bar CounCil of Jharkhand

Jharkhand

5.

Bar Council of Madhya Pradesh

Madhya Pradesh

6.

Bar Council of Chhaltisgarh

Chhaltlsgarh

(Co lltd.)

524

(! Indian Pality
Name

States & UTs Covered

7.

Bar Cou ncil of Karnat aka

Karnataka

8.

Bar Coundl of Orlss8

Odisha

9.

Bar Council of Rajasthan

Rajasthan

10.

Bar Council of Telan ana

Telangana

11.

Bar Council of Uttar Pradesh

Uttar Pradesh

12.

Bar Council of Uttarakhand

Uttarakhand

13.

Sar Council of Meghalaya

Meghalaya

14.

Bar Council of Manlpur

Manlpur

15.

Sar Council of Tripura

Tripura

16.

Bar Council of Arunachal Pradesh. Assam, Mlzoram

Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Mlzoram and

and Nagaland

Nagaland

17.

Bar Council of Kerata

Kerala and Lakshadweep

18.

Bar Council of Madras

Tamil Nadu and Puducherry

19.

Bar Council of Maharashtra and Goa

Maharashtra, Goa and Dadra and Nagar
Haveli and Daman and Di u

20.

Bar Council of Punjab and Harvena

Punjab. Haryana and Chandlgarh

21.

Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh

Himachal Pradesh

22.

Bar Council of West Bengal

West Bengal and Andaman and Nlcobar
Islands

23.

Bar Council of Delhi

Delhi

24.

Bar Council of Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh

SI No

l

l Added by t he Jammu and Kash m ir Reorgan isat ion Act , 2019

Jammu and Kashmir, and ladakh

·

CHAPTE'R

70

Law Commission
of India

T

he Law Commission of India is a non·
statutory advisory body. It is established by the order of the Central
Government 1 from time to time for a fixed
tenure. Its function is to recommend legislative measures for the purpose of consolidation and codification of laws. However, its
recommendations arc not binding on the
government.

t HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

During the British regime, fo ur Law Commissions were established in the ] 9th century.
They made a significant contribution towards
the enrichment of the Indian Statute Book.
They recommended a variety of legislations
on the pattern of the then prevailing English
laws adopted to Indian conditions. The Indian
Penal Code, the Criminal Procedure Code, the
Civil Procedure Code, the Indian Contract Act,
the Ind ian Evidence Act, the Transfer of Property Act and some other laws are the products
of these fo u r Commissions.
The names of these Commissions, the
years in which they were constitu ted and

the names of their Chairmen are mentioned
in Thble 70.1.

1

COMMISSIONS CONSTITUTED
SO FAR

After Independence, the Constitution of
India with separate chapters on Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of State
Policy gave a new direction to law reform
in the country. Article 372 of the Constitution provides that the pre-Constitution
laws shall remain in force until they are
amended or repealed. However, there h ad
been demands in Parliament and outside for
the establishment of a new Law Commission
to recommend the revision and updation
of the outmoded and outdated laws to serve
the cbanging needs of the nation. The Government reacted favourably to this demand
and established the First Law Commission
of independent India in 1955. The term of
this Commission was three years and it was
headed by Me Setalvad, the then AttorneyGeneral of India.

Table 70.1 Pre-independence Law Commissions

,

Name

Establish ment Year

Chairman

fi rst Law Commission

Lord Macaulay

I~CO~d la~ COf11miSSiOn

1834

1853

Sir John Romilly

Third Law Commission

1861

Sir John Romilly

Fourth Lew"COmryllssion

1879

Dr Whitney Stokes

IThe order is issued by the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice.

526 ,{if' Indian Polity
Table 70.2

Law Commissions Appointed so far

law Commission

Duration

Chairman

First

1955-1958

M C Setalvad, Former Attorney-General of India

Second

1958-1961

Justice T V Venkatarama Aiyar

Third

1961-1964

Justice j L Kapur

Fourth

i964-1968

justice J L Kapur

Fifth

1968-1971

K.V.K. Sundaram, !.C.S.

Sixth

1971-1974

Justice P B Gajendragadkar

Seventh

1974-1977

Justice P B Gajendragadkar

Eighth

1977-1979

Justice H R Khanna

Ninth

1979-1980

Justice P V Dixit

Tenth

1981-1985

Justice K K Mathew

Eleventh

1985-1988

Justice D A Desai

Twelfth

1988-1991

Justice M P Thakkar

Thirteenth

1991-1994

Justice K N Singh

Fourteenth

1995-1997

Justice K Jayachandra Reddy

Fifteenth

1997-2000

Justice B P Jeevan Reddy

Sixteenth

2000-2003

Justice B P Jeevan Reddy (2000-2001). Justice M Jagannadha
Rao (2002-2003)

Seventeenth

2003-2006

Justice M Jagannadha Rao

Eighteenth

2006-2009

Justice A R Lakshmanan

Nineteenth

2009-2012

Justice P Venkatarama Reddy

Twentieth

2012-2015

Justice D K Jain (2012-2013), Justice A P Shah (2013-2015)

Twenty-First

2015-2018

Twenty·Second

2020-2024

Justice B 5 Chauhan
2

Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi 3

Si nce then ( 1955), twenty-o ne m ore Law
Com mi $s io ns have been con stitu ted , each with
J t h ree-year te rm and with di ffere n t term s of

l COMPOSITION

r efe r ence. The n a m e of t hese Co m missio n s,
th e ir durad o n a nd th e na me o f th e i r Chai r-

T h e compos i t i on of t h e C o m m iss i o n i s n ot
rixed. It varies fro m one Co mm iss i on to
ano th er. Ge ne ra II)" it co n si sts of <l Ch a irma n ,
som c full-timc me mbers, a m e mbe r -sec r eta r y

m e n a rc give n i n 'TIl ble 70.2.

a nd so m e pa r t-tim e m em b e r s d ep e ndin g

ZThe 22nd Law Com miss ion of Ind ia \\'as constituted on 21st Fcb ruary, 2020 for a term of three years. Its te rm
ended on 201h February, 2023. The Union Cabinet on 22nd February, 2023 approved the ex tension of the
term of the Co m mission upto 31st AugUSt, 2024.
4-hough the 22nd Law Commission of India was co nstituted in February 2020, its c h,tinnan and mem bers
were appoin tcd afte r two and a halfyc<lrs in Nove m be r, 2022.

Low Commission of Indio

upon the nature of topi cs refe rred to it for
con sideration .
The Ch a irm a n and full-tim e m embe rs are
e ithe r serving or retired judges of the Supre me
Court or High Courts, or lega l expe rts, j uri sts
or professors oflaw in an y university oflndia.
Th e Member-Secretary be longs to the Indi a n
Legal Service a nd holds the ra nk of e ithe r Additiona l Secretary or Secre ta ry to the Gove rnment of Indi a.
The p a rHime members a rc appointed fro m
among th e e minent members of the bar or
e minent scholars in the aca de mi c field or
pe rsons h aving speci a li sed kn owl edge in a
particula r bra nch of law.
Th e Commission's regula r staff con sists of
about a doze n research p erso nne l of diffe re nt
ranks and va ried expe rien ces. A small group of
secretarial sta ff looks afte r the a dministra tion
side of th e Co mmission 's opera ti on s.

~ FUNCTIONS
The fun c ti o n s o f th e Commiss ion arc as
foll ows:
1 . 1b iden tify laws which are no lon ger
needed or rel evant a nd can be imm edi a tely re peal ed
2. Th examine the exi sting laws in the light
of Directive Princ iples of Sta te Policy
and suggest ways of imp roveme n t a nd
re fornl a nd also suggest such legislations
a s might be n ecessa ry to impl e m e nt
th e Directive Prin c iples a nd to attain
th e obj ectives set out in th e Preamb le
of the Co nstitutio n
3. 1b con side r a nd con vey to the Governme nt
its views on a ny subje ct re lating to law
and judic ial admini stration th at may
be s pe cifi ca ll y re fe rred to it by th e
Gove rnm ent
4. 1b co n sider the requ ests fo r providing
resea rch to a ny fore ign coun tries as may
be refe rre d to it by the Gove rnm e nt
5. 1b take a ll such measure s a s m ay b e
necessary to harn ess law a nd the lega l
proce ss in th e service of the poor

~ 527

6. 1b revise the Central Acts of general impor-

ta nce so as to simpli fy the m and remove
an omali es, a mbiguities a nd inequities

~ WORKING
The workin g of the Co mmission co ns ists of
the following stages:
1. T he p rojects und erta ke n by the Commi ss ion are in itia ted in its mee tin gs.
2. Pri orities a re discussed, topics are identifi ed a nd preparatory work is assign ed to
the me mbe rs.
3. Diffe rent methodolog ies fo r coll ection
of da ta a nd resea rch a re adopted keeping in vi ew tne scop e o f t he proposed
re form .
4. A working pape r, outlining the problem a nd suggesting ma tters dese rvin g
reform, e merges as the outcom e.
5. Thi s pa per is sen t o ut fo r circ ula ti on
in th e public a nd co ncern ed in te rest
groups with a view to eliCiting reaction s
and suggestion s
6. Respon ses a re evalua ted a nd the inform ation is o rga nised fo r pro pe r inco rpo ra·
tion in the report
7. T h e report is subj ected to close scrutiny
by th e full Commiss ion in pro lo nged
meetings for its fin alisation .
8. The fin a l re port is fo rwa rde d to the
Government (Ministry of Law a nd J ustice)
Th e rep orts of the Co mmi ssion a re co n sid·
ered by th e Mini stry of Law and J usti ce in
consultation 'v1th the conce rn ed administrative
mini stri es and are subm itted to Pa rli ament
from tim e to time.
Till n ow, the Commi ssio n submitted 277
repo rts on diffe rent subj ects. T he reports submitted by the 21st Commissio n a re m e nti o ned
in Thbl e 70.3.

~ ROLE
The followin g poin ts hi ghli ght th e role of the
Commissio n :
1. The Gove rnm en t ge ts th e ben e fit of reco mm e ndation s from a specialised body

528 {! Indian Polity
o n d iffere nt aspec ts of law whic h arc
en t ru sted to th e Co mmi ssio n for its
study and recom mend ations , as per its
terms of refere n ce.
2. The Comm ission , on a refere nce made
to it by the Ce n tra l Gove rnm ent or suomotu, u nderta kes resea rch in law and
rev iews ex isti n g laws in Ind ia fo r making reform s therei n and enact ing n ew
legisla tions.

3. The Comm issio n under ta kes studie s a nd
resea rch for brin ging refo rm s in the justice delivery system s for the elimi natio n
of delay in p rocedu res, speed y d isposa l
of cases, red uction in the cost of lit igatio n , etc.
4. The variou s Com m ission s have been able
to make a n im porta n t contr ib utio n
towards the prog ress ive deve lopme nt
and codifi catio n of Law of the co u ntry.
2018)'

Table 70. 3

Report s submi tted by the 21st Law Comm ission of India (201S·

Report No

Year of SubmIs sIon

Subjec t of t he Report

263

2016

The Protect ion of Childre n (Inter-C ountry Remova l and Retentio

264

2017

The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bdl, 2017 (Provisions dealing wtth
Adulteration)

265

2017

Prospects of Exempting Income Arising out of Mainten ance

266

2017

The Advocates Act. 1961 (Regulation of Legal Profession)

267

2017

The Hate Speech

268

2017

269

2017

Transportation and House Keeping of Egg laying Hens (l ayers)
Chicken s

270

2017

Compufsory ReglStlaUon of Marriages

271

2017

Human DNA Profiling - A Draft Bill for the Use and Regulation
Techno logy

2n

2017

Assessment of Statutory Framework of Tribunals In India

273

2017

and other
Implem entation of 'United Nal ions Conven tion Against Torture
h Legisla tion
Throug
ent'
Punishm
or
ent
Treatm
Cruel, Inhuman and Degrad ing

274

2018

Review of the Contem pt of Courts Act. 1971

275

2018

276

2018

277

2018

n) Bill, 2016

Food

Money of Minor

to SaIl
Amendments to Criminal Procedure COde, 1973- ProvisIonS RetaUng
and Bfoiler

of DNA Based

Legal Framew ork: BCCI vis-a-vis Right to informa tion Act. 2005
Cricket In India
Legal Framew ork: Gambll !lg and Sports Betting Includin g In
Wrongful Prosec ution (Miscarriage of Justice): Legal Remedies

",h is in fo rmatio n is obt.1ined fro m the officia l website of the Law Comm

ission of India.

Delimitation
Commission of India

The word 'delim itation' literall y mea n s the
act or process of fixing lim its or boundaries
of territorial co nstituen cies in a country or
a Province having a legislat ive body. The job
of delimitation is assigned to a hi gh-powered
body. Such a body is known as Delimitat ion
Co mmi ssion or a Boundary Commi ssion l .

~ RATIONALE OF DELIMITATION
Periodic delimitation and election s co nst itute the pi llars of th e Indian p arliamentary
democracy. The following poi nts clearly bring
out the importa n ce of delimitation:
L Free and fair election s are the hallmark
of a truly democratic state. What makes
a parliamentary democracy the preferred
syste m of governance is that it allows
people to choose their representatives
by using the e l ~ctora l process. Elections
are integral to the parliamentary democracy and therefore delimitation of co nstituencies assumes great importance.
Delimitation exercise conducted following the legal provision s and accepted
norms secures to the people fair elections.
Periodic drawing of electoral boundaries
which is what the delimitation process
does is therefore a lega ll y ma ndated
exercise in a representative system where
single member constituencies are used
for electing political represen tatives 2 •
IChanging Face of Electoral India: Delimitation 2008,
Delimitation Commission of India, p. 1.
2 Ran j ana Prakash Desai, Delimi tation Report 2022,
p. (il ·

2. Delimitation is a complex matter and
needs to b e a pproach ed sens itively
as th is prov ides foundation to democrat ic exerc ise of publi c representatIons
thro ug h elec tion s in modern times.
Theoretically, delimitation is a steppin g stone for creation of a body polity
to gove rn th e affairs of public at large
through territorial con cept of elected
representation. It is imperative that
such exercises a re taken on periodic
intervals to reflect the changing ground
realities3 .
3. The prin ciple of one m an, one vote
envisages that there should b e parity
in the value of votes of electors. Such a
parity though ideal for a representative
democracy is diffi cu lt to achi eve. There
is so me depa rture in every system follow ing thi s democ ratic path. In the
matter of de1imitatio n of constituencies, it often happens that the population of the one const itu ency differs
from that of the other co n stituen cy. As
a result, although both the co n sti tuencies elect one member, the value of the
vote of the elector in the constituen cy
having lesser popul at io n is more th a n
the value of the vote of the elector
of the co n stituen cy having a la rger
population 4 •

lSushil Chand ra, Delimitation Report 2022, p. (vii).
4rhis observation was made by the Supreme Court
in R.C. Poudyal vs. Union of India case (1993) .

530 ,~ '"d;," Polity

1

2. The total number of existi ng seats in the
Legislative Assemblies of all sta tes6 as
fixed on the basis of 1971 cens us shal!
a lso remain unaltered till the first ce nsus to be t<lken aftcr the year 2026
3. The number of seats to be reserved for the
Sc heduled Castes and Schedu led Tribes
in the Lok Sabha and State Legislative
Assemblies shall be re-worked out on
the basis of 200 1 census
4 . Each state sha ll be redelimitcd into territori a l parliamentary and assembly
consti ruencies on the basis of2001 census
and the extent of such co nstit uencies il S
delimited now shall remain frozen till the
first census to be taken after the year 2026
5 , The constituencies sha ll be so re-delimited
that population (on the ba sis of 2001 census) of each parliamentary and assembly constituency in a state shall, so far
as practicable, be the sa me throughout
the state

COMMISSIONS ESTABLISHED
SO FAR

The Delimita tion Com mi ssion of India is H
statutory (an d not a constitutiontll) body.
It is esta blished by the Ce ntral Gove rnment
under the provis ions of a law enacted by the
Parliamen t. Its function is to demarcate the
boundaries of the Parliament,HY and Assembl y Constituencies in the country.
The Commission is a powerfu l body, Its orders
have the force of law and cannot be challenged
in any court. The orders come into force on a
date specified by the President of India. They are
laid before the Lok Sabha and the State Legislative Asse mbly concerned. But, modifications arc
not pemlissible therein by them,
So far, four sllch Commissions have been
constituted. The names of these Commi ssions, the yea r in which they were established
and the name of the Act under which they
were established are ment ion ed in Thhle 71.1.

t CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
Articles 81, 82, 170, 330 and 332 of the Const itution of India dea l with the de limitation
of the Parliamentary and Assembly Constituen cies. These Articles were amended by the
84th Constitutional Amendment Act of 2001
and the 87th Constitutional Amendment Act
of 2003. The cu mulati ve effec t of these two
5
amendments to the Constitution is as follows :
1. The total number of existing sea ts as allocated to various states in the Lok Sablw
on the basi s of 1971 census shall remai n
una1tered till the first census to be taken
after the year 2026
.>rhis information is adopted from the official
website of the Election Commi ssio n of India.
Ta ble 71.1

FOURTH DELIMITATION
COMMISSION
In pursuan ce of the a bove m e ntion ed provisi ons of the Constitution, the Parliament
enac ted the Delim itation Act, 2002 and provided for the establishment of a Delimitation
Co mmi ssio n . The Com mission 's task under
the Constitution and the Delimitation Act of
2002 7 was to readjust the Parliame ntary and
Assembly co nst ituenci es in all the states of
6'Statc' here does not include the erstwhile stilte of
Jammu and Kashmir, but includes the National
Ca pital l erritory of Delhi and the Union lcrritory
of ruducherry.
7T he Delimit.ation Au, 2002 was ame nded in 2003,
2008 and 2016.

Delimitation Commissions constituted 50 far

Delimitation CommisSion

Established In

Established under the Act

First

1952

The Delimitation Commission Act, 1952

Second

1963

The Delimitation Commission Act, 1962

Third

1973

The Delimitation Act, 1972

Fourth

2002

The Delimitation Act, 2002

Delimitation Commission of India

\

,

J

,

lndia (except the erstwhile state of Jammu
and Kashmir) on the ba sis of 2001 census.
The Fourth Delimitation Commission of
2002 was a three-member body. It consisted
of the following:
] . The Chairperson who was to be e ither a
servi ng o r a retired judge of the Supre m e
Co urt
2. The Chief Election Co mmi ss ioner or an
Election Commi ss ion er nominated by
the Chief Election Co mmissioner was
an ex-officio member
3. The State Election Com missioner of concerned State or Union Territory was the
other ex-o fficio member
Additionally, the Co mmiss ion had ten
assoc iate members in respect of each state.
Out of them, five were members of the Lok
Sabha elected from that sta te and another
five were members of the State Legislative
Assembly. Where the number of members of
t he Lok Sabha in a state was less than five, all
slich members were the associate members
for that state. T"h ese associated members were
nominated by the Speakers of the Lok Sabha
an d State Legislative Assemblies co ncerned .
However, these associated members did not
have the right to vote or to sign any order of
the Co mmission.
Justice Kuldip Singh, a retired judge of the
Supreme Court, was appointed as the Chairperso n of the Co mmi ss ion.

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE
RECOMMENDATIONS
The Commission submitted its recommendations to the Government in 2007. The
President of India signed the notifi catio n
for implementing the recommendations of
the Co mmi ssion in 2008, thereby redefining
ParJiamentary and Assembly Constituencies.
The recommendatio ns of the Commission
are n ot applicable to five states, i.e. Assam,
Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Nagaiand and
Jha rkhand. The Government of India deferred
the delimitation exercise in the four northeastern sta tes and nullified the final order of
the Co mmi ss ion for the state of Jharkh and.

'!1 531

The 2009 General Elections to the Lok Sabha
for 499 out of 543 Parliamentary constituenc ies in all the states, National Capital Territory
of Delhi and Union Territory of Puducherry
(except Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur,
Naga land, Jharkhand and erstwhile Jammu
and Kashmir) were held on the basis of the
newly delimi ted con stituencies.

DELIMITATION COMMISSION
(2020)
In February 20208 , the Government of India
rescinded it s earlier (2008) notifi cations
which had deferred th e delimitation exercise
in the four north-eastern states of Assam,
Arunachal Prad esh, Manipur and Nagaland
on the grounds of a likely threat to the unity
and integrity of India as well as a serious
threat to the peace and public order in these
states. The Government had said that there
was a significant improvement in the security
situation in these states. Further, there was
also reduction in in surgen cy incidents and
improvement in law and order of these slates
making the situation conducive for carryi ng
out the de limitation exerci se. Th erefore, it
appeared that the circumstances that led to
the deferring of the delimitation exercised in
these states have ceased to exist and that the
delimitation of the co nst ituencies as envisaged under the De limitation Act, 2002 co uld
be carried out now.
Subsequently, in March 20209 , the Government of India set-up a Delimitation Co mmission for the purpose of delimitation of
Parliamentary and Assembly constituencies in
these four north-eastern states and the Union
'Territory of Jammu and Kashmir (UT of J&K).
This Commission co n s i ste ~ of the following
members:
( i) Justice Ranjana Prakash Desai, a retired
judge of the Supreme Court, as the
Cha irperson .
BOrder dated 28th February, 2020 issued by the
Ministry of Law and Justice.
9 Notification dated 6th March, 2020 issued by the
Ministry of Law and Just ice.

532

,r;J Indian Polity

(ii) Sus hil Cha ndra , Elect ion Co mmiss io ner,
as th e ex-officio membe r.
(iii) Th e State Electi o n Com m iss ioner of the
con ce rn ed State or UT, as th e oth e r exofficio m e mber.
The appoint m e n t of Ju s ti ce Ra njana
Prakash Desa i wa s fo r a per iod of on e year
or ti ll further o rders, whicheve r was ea rlier.
'fh e Commi ss ion was ass ig ned th e fo ll owin g tas k:
(i) 10 deli mit the con stituen cies in the above
four north-easte rn states in <lcco rda n ce
with th e provis ions o f the De limi tati o n
Act, 2002.
(ii) 10 delim it the constituen cies in th e UT of
J& K in acco rdan ce wit h th e provi s io ns

of the J&K Reorgilni sa ti o ll Act, 20 19 a n d
the Delimitation Act, 2002.
Howeve r, in March 202110 , th e Govern m e nt
o f Indi a removed th e above fouT-llorth eastern states fro m t he Co mmi ssio n 's purview.
F'urt her, the term oF th e Comm iss io n was a lso
extend ed by one yea r ( i.e., till Ma rc h 2022)
to ena bl e it to' co ntin ue with its de lim itatio n
wo rk in th e UT of J & K. Again, in Feb ru ary
2022 11 , the Co mmi ss ion was give n anot her
two month s ' extension ( Le., ti ll May 2022).
The Co mmi ss ion a lso a ssoc iated in its
work, fi ve m em bers of Lok Sa bha e lected from
the UT of J & K. T hey we re nominated by t he
Speaker of Lo k Sab ha. But, th ey had n o votin g
rig hts.
T h e Co mmi ss ion co mp leted its task i n
May 2022. The repo rt o f the Co m m iss ion is
en titl ed as "Deli mited Land scape of Uni o n
Territory of Jammu & Kashmir".

~ DELIMITATION IN J&-K I2
Deli mitati on exerc ise cond ucted in J & K in
th e pa st has bee n d iffe re n t from the on e's
co nducted in t he rest of th e co u n try beca use
IONot ificatiol1 daled 3rd March, 2021 issued by the
Min istry of Law and J ustice.
lI Not ifi calion dated 21st Februa ry, 2022 issued by
th e Mi nistr y o f Law and Justice.
l2.yhi s information is ado pted fro m the Del imitation
Re port 2022.

of the reg ion 's sp ecial statu s wh ich was withdrawn by the J & K Reorga ni sat io n Act, 2019.
Unti l th en, delim it<Hi on of Lo k Sa bha seats
in J & K was gove rn ed by th e Co n stitu tion of
India . But, the de limitati on of State Legisla·
ti ve Asse mbl y scats was governed by the Cons li llu ion of J& K and th e J & K Represe ntat io n
of Peo pl e Act, 1957.
The I\ sse mbl y seat s in J& K we re d elimited
in 1957, 1966, 1975 <I nd 1995. The last exercise
was con du cted on th e basi s o f 198] census. It
formed the bas is of t he s tate el ectio n s in 1996.
There wa s no ce ns us in the s tate in 1991 a nd
n o De li mi tat ion COlllmi ss io n was se t u p by
the State Gove rnm e nt afte r 2001 as the State
Assembl y pa ssed a law putting a freeze on
fres h delimitation o f scats un t il the re leva nt
figu res fo r th e first ce n sus w ke n after the year
2026 have bee n publi shed. T he J& K Assem bl y
at t hat tim e had 111 seats whi ch incl uded
4 sea ts in L~ld ak h . Also , 24 seats of these we re
kept resCl'ved for Pak is tan occupied J & K.
The J& K Reorga ni sat ion Act, 2019 has p rovided fo r th e creation of the UT of J & K. Th is
Act ha s provided fo r a Legisla t ive Asse mbly for
the UT of J& K a nd t he total nu m ber of seats
in th e Assemb ly to be filled by di rect e lections
has bee n fixcd as 11 4. T he re is a lso a be ndi·
cent provi s ion fo r nomination of 2 wo m en
members to t he Asse mbl y by the Lie ute nant
Gove rnor, if in h is/ h er opinion wom e n are
not adequ ately re presen ted. fllfl her, th is Ac t
ha s also provid ed that for th e area of th e UT
of J& K undc r occu pation o f Paki stan , 24 scats
in the Assembl y sha ll re main vaca n t, and
(he sa id area a nd scats s hall be excluded i n
delim iting the territoria l con stitue nc ies. Thus,
th e re is an increase of 7 sea ts in th e Leg islati ve Assembly of th e UT of J & K.
T h e pre se nt Delim itation Co mmi ss io n
was e nt r us (cd w ith the work of de limi ting
th e Pa rliam e nta ry and Asse mbl y Constit ue nci es i n th e UT of J &K on the has is of
201 1 ce n su s and i n accordance wi th t h e
prov is ion s of the J & K Reorga ni s~ltion Ac t,
2019 and the p rov is ion s o f the Del imitati o n
Act, 2002. T h e 201 I ce n sliS po pUlation ha d
in c rea sed more th a n 100% over the 198 1

Delimitation Commission of India

census population of J&K. Since the la st
delimitation was based on 1981 cen sus, th e
na ture of constituencies had to a large extent
b eco me m alapportioned.
Having regard to the relevant provision s
of the Constitution of India (Article 330 and
Article 332) , the provisions of the J&K Reorganisation Act, 2019 and the provision s of the
Delimitation Act, 2002, th e number of seats
to be reserved for th e SCs and the STh in th e
Legislative Assembly of the UT of J&K has
been worked out on the basis of 2011 cen sus.
It is worthwhile to menti on h ere that the
Constitution of the erstwhile State of J&K did
not provide for reservation of sea ts for the STh
in the Legislative Assembly.

t ORDER OF THE COMMISSION

\

y,

]n May 2022 13 , the Co mmission made the
final order in respect of the delimitation of
Parliamenta ry and Assembly co nstituencies
in the UT of J&K. The various provisions of
thi s order are as follows:
] . The Commission ha s treated the J&K as a
single entity for the purpose of delimi tation. Consequently, a ll 5 Parliamentary
constituencies now have equal number
of 18 Asse mbly Constituencies.
2. Anantnag - Rajouri Parliamentary
Constituency has been carved out
by comb ining Anantnag area of th e
Ka shmir region and Rajouri & Poon ch
area of th e Jammu region.
3. Out of th e total 90 Assembly constitu encies in the J&K, 43 are for the Jammu
region and 47 are for the Kashmir
region.
4. Creation of 6 new Assembl y constituencies for the Jammu region and I new
Assembly constituency for the Ka shmir
region .
5 . Reservation of9 Assembly constituencies
for the 8Th. Out of these, 6 are in the
Jammu region and 3 are in the Kashmir
region.
13 Notifi cation

dated 5th May, 2022 issued by the
Delimitation Co mmission.

~ 533

6. Reservation of 7 Asse mbly constituencies
for the SCs.
7. The Commission has a lso changed the
names of so me Assembly co nstituencies.
One Asse mbly constituency is named as
5hri Mata Vaishno Devi .

RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMMISSION J4
During the publi c hearing, the Commissio n
rece ived number of re prese ntation s from
the Ka shmiri migrants and the displa ced
person s from Pakistan o cc upied Jammu
and Kashmir (PoJ &K)IS. The delegation s of
Kashmiri migrants represented before the
Co mmission that they were persecuted an d
forced to li ve in exi le as refugees in their
own co untry for the la st three decades. It
was urged that in ord er to preserve their
politi ca l rights, seats may be reserved for
them in the J &K Asse mbl y and Parliament. The di splaced pe rso n s from PoJ&K
also requ ested the Commission to rese rve
few sea ts for them in the J&K Assembly.
Accordingl y, the Commission made the
following recommendations to the Central
Governm ent:
1. Kashmiri Migrants: Provis ion of at
least two members (one of them must
be a female) from the comm unity of
Kashmiri migrants in the J&K Assembly.
Such members may be given power
at par with the power of nominated
members of th e Asse mbly of UT of
Puducherry.
2. Displaced Persons from PoJ&K: Th e
Ce ntral Government may consider
giving the displa ced persons from
PoJ&K some representation in the J&K
Assembly_ This may be done by way of
nomination of representatives of the
displaced pe rsons from PoJ&K.
l"This infonnation is adopted from the official
website of the Election Commission of India .
IS Persons di splaced from PoJ&K during 1947-48,
1965 a nd ]971.

534

,G'! Indian Polity

Table 71.2

National Commissions/Central Bodies and their Nodal Ministries

Ministry of Personnel

1.

Central Information Commission

2.

Finance Commission

3.

Union Public Service Commission

Ministry of Personnel

4.

Inter-State Council

Ministry of Home Affairs

5.

Staff Selection Commission

Mlnistry of Personnel

6.

National Commission for SCs

7.

Natio nal Commission for STs

8.

Central Vigilance Commission

Ministry of Personnel

9.

Zonal Councils

Ministry of Home Affairs

10.

Central Bureau of InvestigatiOn

Ministry of Personnel

11.

National Investigation Agency

Ministry of Home Affairs

12.

Commissioner for L1ngulstlc Minorities

Ministry of Minority Affairs

13.

National Commission for Protection of Child Rights

Ministry of Women and Child Development

14.

National Commission for Backward Classes

MinIstry of Social Justice & Empowerment

15.

Chief Commissioner for Disabled Persons

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment

16.

Central Social Welfare Board

17..

North Eastern Council

Ministry of Development of the North
Eastern Region

18.

Central Administrative Tribunal

Ministry of Personnel

19.

National Commission for Minorities

Ministry of Minority Affairs

20.

National Human Rights Commission

Ministry of Home Affall'5

21.

National Commission for Women

Ministry of Women and Child Development

22.

Good and Servlces Tax Council

Ministry of Finance

23.

Lokpal

Ministry of Personnel

24.

Nat/onal Disaster Management Authority

Ministry of Home Affairs

25.

Attorney General of India

Ministry of Law and Justice

26.

Solicitor General of India

Ministry of Law and Justice

n

Law Commission of India

Ministry of Law and Justice

28.

Elf!ctlon Commission of India

Ministry of Law and JusUce

29.

Delimitation Commission of India

Ministry of Law and Justice

30.

National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission

Ministry of Consumer Affairs

31.

Bar Cou ncil of India

Ministry of Law and Justice

32.

NITI Aayog

33.

Comptroller and Auditor General of India

Ministry of Finance

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment
Ministry of Tribal Affai rs

Ministry of Women and Child Development

Ministry of Planning
Ministry of Finance

In this Part...
72. Co-operatlve Societies
73. OffIcial Language
74. Public Services
75. Rights and Liabilities of the Government

CHAPTER

.

T

he 97th Constitutional Amendment Act
of 2011 gave a co nstitutional status and
protection to co-operative societies.
In this context, it made th e following three
changes in th e constitution:
1. It made the right to fonn co-operative societies a fundamental right (Article 191) .
2. It included a new Directive Principle of
State Policy on promotion of co-operative
societies (Article 43_B 2).
3. It added a new Part lX-B in the Constitution
which is entitl ed ~The Co-operative
Societies" (Articles 243·ZH to 243·ZT).

~ CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
Part IX-B of the constitution contains the fo llowing provisions with respect to the co-operative

societies:
•

Incorporation of Co--operative Societies: The
state legislature may make provisions for the
incorporation, regulation and winding-up of
lIn Part III of the Constitution, .i n Article 19, in

clause (1), in sub-cla use (c), the words uco-operative
societies- were inserted.
21n Part IV of the Constitution, a new Article 43-8
was inserted, which saYS: "The state shall endeavour
to promote voluntary formation, autonomous
functioning, democratic control and professional
management of co-operative societies".

76. Speclol Provisions Relating to Certain
Classes
77. Special Provisions for Some States

Co-operative
Societies

co-operative societies based on the principles
of voluntary formation, democratic membercontrol, member-economi c participation and
autonomous functioning.
Number and Term of Members of Board ond
its Office Bearers: The board shall consist of
such number of directors as may be provided
by the state legislature. 3 But, the maximum
number of directors of a co-operative society
shall not exce.e d twenty-one.
The state legislature shall provide for the
reservation of one seat for the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes and two seats
for women on the board of every co-operative
society having members from such a category
of persons.
The term of office of elected members of
the board and its office bearers shall be five
years from the date of e1ection. 4
~e "board- means the board of directors or the

governing body of a e<roperative society, by
whatever name called, to whi ch the direction
and control of the management of the affairs of a
society is entrusted to.
4 An "office bearer" means a President, vi~Presiden t,
chairperson, vice-chairperson, secretary or treasurer
of a co-operative society and includes any other
person to be elected by the board of any co-operative
society.

536

fJ

Indian Polity

Th e state legisla ture shall ma ke provisio ns
for co-optio n of persons hav ing experience in
the field of banking, management, fll1an ce or
specialisation in any other related ficld, as members of the boa rd . But, the numbe r of sli ch coopted members shall not exceed two (in addition
to twenty-one directors). Further, the co-o pted
members shall not have the right to vote in any
election of the co-opcm tivc soc iety or be cJi!;,rible
to be elected as office bearers of the board.
The fun ctiona l directors of a co-ope rati ve
society shall also be t he me mbers of th e board
and s lich membe rs sha ll be excluded for the
purpose of co un t in g the total number of
direc tors (that is, twenty-one).

Election of Members of Board: The e lection of
a board shall be conducted be fore the expiry
of the term of the board so as to e nsure that
the newly e lected mcmbers ass um e office
imm ediate ly on th e expiry of th e term of
the office of membe rs of th e outgoing board.
The supe rintenden ce, direction and control
of th e preparation of clectoral rolls and t he
conduct of e lec tio ns to <I co-o perati ve soc iety
shall vest in such body, as may be provided
by the state legi slature.
Supersession and Suspension of Board and
Interim Management: No board sha ll be superseded or ke pt unde r suspension for a pe r iod
exceed ing six month s. s The board may be
superseded or kept und e r suspen sio n in case
( i) Of its pers istc nt defau lt
( ii) Of neglige nce in the performa nce of its
duties
(Hi) Of co mmitting any act prcjudicial to
the intcrests of the co-operati ve SOCiety
or its members
( iv) Of there being a sta le mate in the co nstitut ion or functions of the board
(v) Of the e lection body having fail ed to
co ndu ct elections in accordan ce with
the provisions of the State Act.
However, t h e board of an y s uch cooperative soc iety sh all n ot be superseded
Sin case of cooperative banks, other than mu Jti-st.1te
cooperative banks, this pe riod c., nnOl exceed o ne
yea r.

or ke pt unde r s uspe n s ion where there is
no Gove rnm e nt sha re ho ldin g or loan or
finan c ial assistance or any guarantee by
th e Govern ment.
I n case of supc rsess io n of a board, th e
adm ini stra tor appointed to manage the affairs
of such a co-operative socie ty sha ll arrange
for condu ct of e lectio ns withi n t he period of
six months and hand over th e managem e nt
to the e lected board.
Audit of Accounts of Co-operative Societies:
Th e sta te legislature may make provisions
for the ma inte nan ce of 'Jcco unts by th e cooperative soc ieties a nd the a uditing of such
accounts at lea st once in each finan c ia l year.
It shall lay down t he minimum qua li fica tio ns
and e;\."pcrience of auditors and auditing firm s
that shall be e li gible for auditing the accou n ts
of th e co-o perati ve soc ieties.
Every co~o p c rati ve society shall b e au dited
by a n auditor o r auditing firm , appointed by
t he general body of the co-operat ivc society.
But, suc h an a uditor or auditing fi rm sha ll be
a ppointed fro m a pane l approved by the State
Gove rnm e nt or a body authorised by the State
Gove rnm c nt on thi s be half.
Th e accounts of every co-operative soc iety
sh.1I1 be audited with in six month s of th e
close of the finan cia l yea r.
The a udit report o f th e accounts of an apex
co-operative soc iety shall be laid before the
statc legislature.
Convening of General Body Meetings: Th e sta te
legi slature may provide that the annua l general
body meeting of every co-operative society shall
be co nve ncd within a period of six months of
the close of the finan cial year.
Right of a Member to Get Information: The state
legislature may provide for access to every
member of a co-operative society to the books,
information and accou nts of the co-operative
society. It may a lso make provisions to e nsure
the participation of members in the man agement of the co-operative soc iety. Further, it may
provide for co-ope rati ve cduC<1.tion a nd training
fo r its members.

Co-operative Societies

Returns: Every co-operat ive society shall fi le
retu-rns, within six months of the close of
eve ry financial year, to the authority designated by the State Government. These returns
shall include the following matters:
(a) Annu al report of its activities
(b) Its aud ited statement of acco unts
(c) Plan fo r su rplus disposal as approved by
the general body of the co-operative
society
(d) List of amendments to the by-laws of the
co-operative society
(c) Declaration regarding date of holding of
its general body m eeting and co nduct of
elections wh en due
(I) Any other informati on required by th e
Reg istrar in pursuance of any of the
provision s of th e State Act. 6
Offences and Penalties: The state legislature
may make provisions ,for the offences relating to the co-operative societies and penalti es
for such offences. Such a law shall include
the commi ss ion or omissio n of th e following
acts as offences:
(3)' A co-operative society wilfully makes a
false return or furnishes fa lse information
(b) }\ny person wilfully disobeys any summ o n, requi sition or o rde r issued under
the State Act
(e) Any employer who, without suffi cien t
cause, fails to pay to a co-operative society
the amount deducted from its employee
within a period of fourteen days
(d) Any officer who wilfu lly fails to handover
custody of books, accounts, documents,
records, cash , security a nd other property belonging to a co-operative society
to an authori sed person
(e) Any person who adopt'i corrupt practices
befo re, during or after th e election of
members of the board or office bea rers.

" I

tirrhe -Registrar" means the Central Registrar appointed by the Central Government in relation to the
mul ti-st.1te co-operative societies and the Registrar
for co-opcrlltive societies <lppointed by the state
government under the law made by the legislature of
a state in relation to co-operative societies.

'tl 537

Application to Multi-state Co-operative Societies:
T he provisions of this part shall apply to the
multi-state co-operative soc ieties subj ect to
the mod ifi cation that any reference to the
UState Leg islature", ~S ta t e Act" or ~S tate Governm en t" shall be co nst rued as a referen ce
to ~Par1i ament", ~Ce ntra l Act" or "Central
Governme nt" resp ectively.
Application to Union Territories: The provisions
of this part shall apply to the Union territories.
But, the President may direct that the provisions
of this part shall not apply to any Union territory or part thereof as he/ she may specify in
the notification.
Continuance of Existing Laws: Any provision
of any law relating to co-operative societies
in force in a state imm ediately b efo re the
com m ence ment of the Con stitution (N in etyseve nth Am endm ent) Ac t, 2011, which is
in co nsistent with the p rovis ions of this part,
sha ll continu e to be in force until amended
or repealed or until the exp iration of one yea r
from such co mmenceme nt, whichever is less.'

j AMENDMENT
REASONS FOR 97

TH

While introducing this amendment bi11 in
the Parlia men t, the Govern ment of India gave
the fo llowing reasons for mak ing thi s amendment to the Con stitution of Indi a:
1. The co-operative sector, over the years,
has made significa nt contribution to various sectors of national economy and has
achieved voluminous growth. Howeve r, it
has shown weaknesses in safeguarding the
interests of the members and fulfilm ent of
objects for which these institutions were
orga ni sed. Th ere have bee n insta n ces
where elections have been postponed
indefinitely and nominated office bearers
' February 15, 2012, is the date of commenceme nt
of the Constitution (Ni nety-seventh Amendment)
Act, 20]1. The Centre has asked state governments
to amend their respective State Cooperative
Society Act in tune with the Constitution (97th
Amen dment) Act, 20 11 before february 14, 2013.

538

(J' Indian Polity

or admin istrators have re ma ined in·charge
of these institutions for a long tim ,~ This
reduces the accountabi lity in the ma nage ment of co-operativc societies '.0 the ir
members. Inadequate professionalism in
manageme nt in ma ny of the co-opc rative
institutions has led to poor service..'!, a nd
low productivity. Co-operatives need to run
on well-estab lished democratic principles
and elections held on tim e and in a free
and fa ir man ner. Therefore, there was a
need to ini tiate fundamcnt.:1i reforms to
revitalise these in st itutions in o rder to
ensure their contribution to the economic
development of th e country and serve
the interests of membe rs a nd public at
large and also to ensure thei r a uton omy,
democratic fun ctio ning and professio na l
management.
2. The ~co·operative soc ieties" is a subject
enum erated in Entry 32 of the state
li st of the Seve n th Schedu le of the
Co nstitution a nd the state legislatures
have accordi ngly enacted leg islations
on co·operative societies. Within the
framework of State Acts, growth of cooperatives o n large scale was envisaged
as part of the efforts for securing socia l
a nd econo mi c justi ce and eq uitable distribution of th e fruits of development.
It has, however, been experienced that
in spite of co nsiderabl e expansion of
co -operatives, their performance in
qu alitative terms has not been u p to
the desired level. Co ns ider in g the need
for reforms in the Co-operative Societies
Acts of the Sta tes, consu ltations with
the State Governments have been held
at seve ral occasions a nd in the co n fer·
ences of state co-ope rat ive ministers. A
strong need ha s bee n fe lt for ame nding the Co nsti tution so as to keep the
co-operatives free from u nn ecessary
outside interferen ces a nd also to ensure
their auto no mous organ isat iona l set up
and the ir de mocratic fun ctioning.
3. The Ce ntral,Gqve,rnplent wa s ,co~n mitte d
to en sure that the co-o perat ive 'societies

in the co un try fUl1ctjOIl in a democratic,
profeSSional, autono mous and econom ica ll y sound manner. With a view to
bring the necessa ry reforms, it was proposed to inco rporate a n ew part in the
Co nstitut io n so as to prov ide for certa in
provisions cove ring the vita l aspects of
working o f co-operat ive soc ieties like
democratic, autonomous and professional fun ct ioning. It was expected that
these provisio ns will not o nly ensure the
a utono mous and de mocratic fu nct io ning of co-operatives, but a lso ensure the
accountability of manage ment to the
members and other stakeholders and
shall provide for deterrence fo r vio lation
of the prov isions of the law.

CONSTITUTIONAL VALIDITY
OF 97 TH AMENDMENT
In RajellclYa Shah cases (2013), the Gujarat
High Cou rt declared that the 97th Co nstitutional Amendment Act (2011) in serting Part
IX-B is u ltra vires the Const itution oflndia for
want of the requisite ratification by the states
under Article 368. Further, the court also held
that this judgement will not impact amendment made in Article 19(1)(c) (fu ndam ental
right to for m the co-operative socie ties) a nd
the insert ion of Article 43-8 (directive principle on promotion of co-operative societies) in
the Constitution of India.
On a n appea l made by the Un io n of India
against the above judgement, the Suprem e
Court ( in 20219) upheld th e judgement of the
Guja rat High Court except to the extent that
it strikes down the entirety of Part IX-B of the
Const itution of India. Further, the Supreme
Court also declared that Part IX-B of the Co nstitution of India is operative only in so far as
it co ncerns multi-state co-operative societies
both within the various states and in the union
territories.
6RajClldl'C! N. SIJlIl1 vs.pl1lotJ of India (2 01 3).
9UPl ioli of IPldia vs. RnjcPldm N. Shall (2021).

Co-operotive Societies
Table 72.1

Articles Related to Co-operative Societies at a Glance

Article No

Subject-matter

243ZH

Definitions

[ 243Z1

r

Incorporation of Co-operative Societies

243ZJ

Number and Term of Members of Board and Its Office Bearers

243ZK

Election of Members of Board

243ZL

Supersession and Suspension of Board and Interim Management

243ZM

Audit of Accounts of Co-operative Societies

243ZN

..

Convening of General Body Meetings

~

I

243Z0

Right of a Member to Get Information

243ZP

Returns

243Z0

Offences aOd Penalties

243ZR

Application to Multi-state Co·operative SocietIes

[ 243Z5
243ZT

'tt 539

ApplicatiOn to Union Territories
Continuance of Existlng laws

j

CHAPTER

73

P

art XVII of the Constitution deal s with
the official language in Articles 343
to 351. Its provisions arc divided into
four heads-Language of the Union, Regiona l
languages, Language ofthcjudiciary and texts
of laws and Spec ial directives.

~ LANGUAGE OF THE UNION
The Constit ution co ntains the following provisions in respect of the official language of
the Union.
1. Hindi written in Devotlogori script is to
be the offic ial language of the Union.
But, the form of numeral s to be used for
the otJiciai purposes of the Union ha s
to be the international form of Indian
numera ls and not the Dev(lI1agari fOfm
of numeral s.
2. However, for a period of fift een years
from the commencement of the Constituti on ( i.e., from 1950 to 1965 ). the
English language wou ld continue to
be llsed for all th e official purposes of
the Union for which it was bein g used
before 1950.
3. Even after fift een yea rs, the Parliament
may provide for the co n tinued usc
of English language for the spec ified
purposes.
4 . At the end of five yea rs, and agil in at the
end of ten years, from the commencement of the Co nstitution , the Presiden t
shou ld appoint a commission to make

Official Language

reco mmendation s with regard to the
progressive use of the Hindi language,
restriction s on the use of the English
1
language and other related issues •
5. A comm ittee of Parliament is to be constituted to exa minc the recommendations of the commission and to report
its views on them to th e President:'!.
Accordingly, in 1955, the president appointed
an Officia l Language Commissio n under the
chairmansh ip of B.G. Khcr. The co mmi ss ion
submitted its report to the President in 1956.
The report was examined by a committee
of Parliament constituted in 1957 under the
chairmanship of Gobind Ballabh Pant. However, another Official Language Co mmiss ion
(as envisagcd by the Constitution ) was not
a ppointed in 1960.
Sub sequentl y, the Parli ame nt enacted the
Officia l Languages Act in 1963. The act provides for the continued use of English (eve n
after 1965), in addition to Hindi, for all officia l purposes of the Union and a lso for the
transaction of bu si ness in Parliament. Notably, this act enables the use of English indefinitel y (without a ny t ime-limit). Further, this
act was amended in 1967 to mak e the use of
IThe Commission was to consist of a ch(lirman
and other members represen ting the different

languages specified in the Eighth Schedule of the
Constituti on.
Zyhe Comm ittee W(lS to consist of 30 members
(20 from Lok Sab ha iln d to from Rajya Sab ll<l).

•
Official Language
English, in addition to Hindi, compulsory in
certain cases3 ,

t REGIONAL LANGUAGES

\

,

I

"

~\-

The Constitution does not specify the official
language of different states. In this regard, it
makes the following provisions:
1. Th~ legislature of a state may adopt any
one or more of the languages in use in
the state or Hindi as the official language of that state. Until that is done,
English is to continue as official language of that state.
Under this provision, most of the states
have adopted the major regional language as their official language. Notably,
the choice of the state is not limited to
the languages enumerated in the Eighth
Schedule of the Constitution.
2. For the time being, the official language
of (he Union (Le., English) would
remain the link language for communications between the Union and the
states or between various states. But,
two or more states are free to agree to
use Hindi (instead of English) for communication between themselves.
The Official Languages Act (1963) lays
down that English should be used for
purposes of communication between
the Union and the non-Hindi states
(that is, the states that have not adopted
Hindi as t'heir official language).
Further, where Hindi is used for communication between a Hindi and a
non·Hindi state, such communication
in Hindi should be accompanied by an
English translation.
~ese include: (a) resolutions, general orders,

I

, )

.

,,

rules, notifications, administrati~'e or other reports
or press communications issued by the Central go·
vernment; (b) administrative an(~ other reports and
official papers laid before Parliament; and (c) contracts and agreements executed, licences, permits,
notices, etc, issued by the Central government or by
a corporation or a company owned by the Central
government.

~ 541

3. When the President (on a demand being
made) is satisfied that a substantial proportion of the population of a state desire
the use of any language spoken by them
to be recognised by that state, then he
may direct that such language shall also
be officially recognised in that state. This
provision aims at protecting the linguistic interests of minorities in the states.

LANGUAGE OF THE JUDICIARY
AND TEXTS OF LAWS
The constitutional provisions dealing with
the language of the courts and legislation
are as follows:
1. Until Parliament provides otherwise, the
following are to be in the English language only:
(a) All proceedings in the Supreme Court
and in every high court.
(b) The authoritative texts of all bills,
acts, ordinances, orders, rules, regulations and bylaws at the Central
and state levels.
2. However, the governor of a state, wi~h the
previous consent of the President, can
authorise the use of Hindi or any other
official language of the state, in the proceedings in the high court of the state,
but not with respect to the judgements,
decrees and orders passed by it. In other
words, the judgements, decrees and
orders of the high court must cp,ntinue
to be in English only (until .P<j,rlial1).ent
otherwise provi.des).
3. Similarly, a state legislature can prescribe the use of any languag~. ,(other
than EngJish) with respect .to bills, acts,
ordinances, orders, rules, regulations or
bylaws, but a translation of the same in
the English language is to be published.
The Official Languages Act of 1963 lays
down that Hindi translation of acts, ordinances, orders, regulations and bylaws published under the authority of the President
are deemed to be authoritative texts. Further,
every bill introduced in the Parliament is

542

,r(! Indian Polity

to be accompan ied by a Hindi tra nslat ion.
Sim ilarly, there is to be a Hindi translatio n
of state acts or ordinances in certa in cases.
The Act also enables the governor of a st...1te,
with th e prev ious co n sent of the Presid e nt,
to authorise th e li se of Hindi or a ny other
offic ial language of the state for judgeme nts,
decrees and orders passed by the high co urt
of the state but they should be accompanied
by a n Eng lish translation.
However, the Parliament has no t made any
provision for t he use of Hindi in the Su preme
Court. Hence, the Supreme Cou rt hears o l1ly
those who pet ition or appea l in English.
The Authorised Translat ions (Central Laws)
Act of 1973 lays down that a translation ill
a ny regional la nguage specified in the Eight
Sc hedul e to the Constitut io n (ot her than
Hindi ) of any central act, ordinance, order,
ru le, regulation and bylaw published under
the a uthori ty of the President in the Official
Gazette is dee med to be the autho ritative texts
thereof i n such la nguage.

t SPECIAL DIRECTIVES
The Co nstitution contains certai n spec ial
directives to protect the interests of linguistic
minorities and to pro mote t he development
of Hindi language. There are:

Protection of Linguistic Minorities
In this regard, t he Const itution makes the
fo ll owi n g p rov is ions:
I. Every aggrieved perso n ha s the right
to submit a repre sentation for the
redress of a ny grievance to any officer
or authority of the Union or a state in
a ny of the languages used in the Unio n
or in t he state, as the case may be. T hi s
mean s that a represe n tat ion cannot be
rejected on the ground that it is not in
the official la nguage.
2. Every state and loca l authority in the
state shou ld provide adeq ume faci lities
for i Il struction in the mother-tongue at
t he primary stage of ed uc'::ltion for the
ch ildren belonging to linguistic minori ty

groups. The Pres ident ca n issue necessary directions for this purpose4 •
3. The Pres ident sho uld appoint a specia l
officer for l inguistic minorities to
investigate all ma tters relat ing to the
co n st itut iona l safeg uards for lin guistic
minorit ies and to report to him / her. T he
President sho uld place all such reports
before the Parl iament and send to the
state government concerned 5 .

Development of Hindi Language
The Constitution imposes a duty upon the Ce ntre to promote the spread and development of
the Hindi language so that it may become the
lil1gua lra / ICll of the composite cultu re of India.
Further, t he Centre is directed to sec ure
th e enrichmen t of Hindi by assimilating the
forms, sty le and exp ress ions used in hindusta ni and in ot her languages specified in the
Eighth Sc hedu le and by drawing its vocabulary, primar il y on Sa nskr it and secondar ily
on ot he r la nguages.
At pre se nt , th e Eighth Sc hedul e of the
Co nst itution spec ifies 22 languages (or iginall y 14 languages). These are Assamese,
Bengali, Bodo, Dogri (Dongri), Gujarati,
Hindi, Kannacia, Kashmiri, Konkani, Math ili
(Ma ithili ), Ma laya la m , Manipuri, Marath i,
Nepa li , Odia 6 , Punjabi , Sanskrit, Santh,i1 i,
Si ndhi , Thmi l, Thlugu and Urdu. Sindhi was
added by the 21st Amendment Act of 1967;
Konkani, Manipu ri and Nepal i were added by
the 71st Amendment Act of 1992; and Bocio,
Dongri, Maithil i and Santhali were added by
the 92nd Ame nd me n t Act of 2003.
In terms of the Co nstitutional provi sions,
there are two objectives beh ind the sp ecificatio n of the above regional languages in the
Eighth Sc hedule:
(a) the members of these la nguages a re to
be given representation in th e Officia l
La nguage Co m mission; and
~his provision was added by the 7th Amendment

Act of 1956 on the recommendation of the States
Reorganisa tion Co mmi ssion.
slbid.
~he 96th Amendment Act of2011 subslituted ~Odi a~
for ~O ri ya".

Official Language

(b) the forms, style and expression of these
languages are to be used for the enrichment of the Hindi language.

COMMITTEE OF PARLIAMENT
ON OFFICIAL LANGUAGE 7
The Official Languages Act (1963) provided
for t.he s~tting up of a Committee of Parliament on Official Language to review the
progress made in the use of Hindi for the
official purpose of the Union. Under the Act,
this Committee was to be constituted after ten
years of the promulgation of the Act (i.e., 26th
January, 1965). Accordingly, this Committee
was set up in 1976. This Committee comprises
of 30 members of Parliament (20 from Lok
Sabha and 10 from Rajya Sabha).
It shall be the duty of the Committee to
review the progress made in the use of Hindi
for the official purposes of the Union and
submit. a report to the President making
recommendations thereon. The President
shall cause the report to be laid before each
House of Parliament and send it to a11 the
State Governments.
, The President may, after consideration of
the report, and the views, expressed by the
St.ate Governments thereon, issue directions
in accordance with the whole or any part of
the report.
The Chairman of the Committee is elected
by the members of the Committee. As a convention, the Union Home Minister has been
elected as Chairman of the Committee from
time to time.
The progressive use of Hindi in the Central Government offices is being reviewed
by the Committee in the background of the
provisions relating to Official Language as
provided by the Constitution; the Official
Languages Act, 1963 and the Rules framed
thereunder. The Committee also takes note
of the circulars/instructions etc. issued by
the Government in this regard from time to
7This infonnation is downloaded from the website of
the Committee of Parliament on Official Language,
Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India.

~ 543

time. The terms of reference of the Committee being comprehensive, it has also been
examining other relevant aspects like the
medium of instructions in 'schools, colleges
and the universities; mode of recruitment to
Central Government services and medium of
departmental examination etc.
The Secretariat of the Committee is headed
by the Secretary of the Committee. For administrative purposes, this office is subordinate
office of D~partment of Official Language,
Ministry of Home Affairs.

~ CLASSICAL LANGUAGE STATUS
In 2004, the Government of India decided to
create. a new category of languages called as
uclassicallanguages~.

So far, six languages are granted the classical
language status. This is shown in Thble 73.1:

Benefits
The following benefits shall be available to
the languages declared or notified as Classical Languages8 :
(i) Thro major international awards for scholars of eminence in Classical Indian
Languages are awarded annually.
(ii) A 'Centre of Excellence for Studies in
Classical Languages' is set up.
(iii) The University Grants Commission be
requested to create, to start with at least
in the Central Universities l a certain
&rhis infonnation is obtained from the official of
the Ministry of Culture, Government of India.
Ta ble 73.1 Languages conferred with Classical
Language Status
51. No.

languages

Year of Declaration

1.

Tamil

2004

2.

Sanskrit

2005

3.

Telugu

2008

4.

Kannada

2008

5.

Malayalam

2013

6.

Odia

2014

544

k'7

Indion Polity

numb e r o f Profess io n a l Ch a irs fo r
Classica l Languages for schol a rs of e min en ce in Classica l Indi a n La n guages.

Criteria
The Gove rn men t of India la id down the fol lowing criteria to dete rm in e the e li gibility of
languages to b e co ns idered for classifica tion
as a Cla ssical La nguage 9 :
( i) High a ntiquity of its ea rly tex ts/ reco rded
hi story over a period of 1500-2000 years.

(ii) A body of a ncie nt li terat ure/ texts, wh ich
is co n s id ered a va luabl e J:!er itage by

gen eratio ns of speakers.
(iii) T he lite ra ry tradi tio n be ori gina l a nd
n ot b o rrowe d fr om a n oth e r sp eech
com munity.

( iv) Th e ' classica l la nguage a nd li te rat ure
be in g di stin ct from m ode rn , the re may
a lso be a dj sco ntinu ity bet wee n the classica l la ngu age a nd its late r fo nns or its
offshoots.

9lbid.website

Table 73.2
Article No

Articles Related to Official Language at a Glance
Subject matter

Language of the Union

343.

--------~--------~

orlheQnIan

344.

Commission and Committee of Parliament on official language

345.

Officia l language or languages of a state

346.

OIIIcIolIoJlg_ for ecmmunftllliQn between one _

347.

Special provision relating to language spoken by a section of the population of a sl ate

34 8.

language to be used in the Supreme Court and in the High Courts and for Acts, Bi lls, etc.

349.

Speciel procecture for enactment of certmn taws relating to lenguage

UnIOn

and _or or between • _ _ the

Special Directives

350A.

Facilities for instruction in mother·tongue at primary stage

3508.

S!>e<IoI otiIcer for IIngUlSlfc rnlnor!tJe!;,
~,--_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _",;",_ _ _ _-!

351 .

Directive for development of the Hindi language

,

I

,

'~-.

CHAPTE;R

74

~ CLASSIFICATION OF SERVICES
The public services (civil services or govern·
ment servic.es) in India are c1assified into
three c;atego~ies-all.lndia services', Central

services and state services. Their meaning
and composition are explained below:

All-India Services
All-India services are those services which
are common to both Central and state govern·
ments. The mem~ers of these services occupy
~op positions (or key po~ts) under both the
Cen~re and th~ states and serve them by turns.
At present, there . are three all-India services. They are:
1 . Indian Administrative Service (lAS)
2. Indian Police Service (IPS)
3. Indian Forest Service (lFoS)
In 1947, the Indian civil Service (ICS) was
replaced by lAS, and the Indian Police (IP)
was replaced by IPS, and were .recognised
by the Constitution as all-India services. In
1966, the Indian Forest Service was established as the third all-India service l .
Article 312 of the .Constitution authorises
the Parliament of India to create new AllIndia Services based on a resolution passed
by Rajya Sabha to that effect. Thus, a new
All-India Service ~an be created only by an
'

..

'In 1963, a pro\'ision ~s made for the creation of
three more all-India services. They were Indian
Forest S,ervice, Indian Medical and Health Service
and Indian 'Service of Engineers, However, out of
these three, only the Indian Forest Service came
into existence in 1966,
•

Public Services

act of Parliament and not by a resolution of
Rajya Sabha, However, the Parliament cannot
do so without the recommendation of Rajya
Sabha. This power is given-to the 'Rajya Sabha
to protect the interests of states in the Indian
federal system.
Interestingly, the Drafting Committee of
the Constituent Assembly did not provide a
constitutional status to the All-India Services.
Accordingly, the Diaft Constitution did not
make any mention of the An-India Services.
However, the Constituent Assembly included
provisions with respect to the All-India Services, which were approved. These provisions
(under Article 312) not only gave a constitUtional status to the All-India Services but also
provided for the creation of ne\;' All-India
Services. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel was' the
chief protagonist of All-India Services in the
Constituent Assembly. Hence, he came to be
regarded as the 'Father of All-India Services'.
The All-India Services Act of 1951 authorised the Central Government to make rules
in consultatfon with the state governments for
the regulation of recruitment 'and service conditions of the members of All-India Services.
The members of these Services are recruited
and trained by the Central Government , but
are assigned to different states for work. They
are 'borne on different state cadres; the 'Gentre
having "no cadre of its own in this regard. They
serve the Central Government on' deputation
and after completing their fixed teriure, 'they
go back to their respective states. The Central
Government obtains the services of ' these
officers on deputation under the well-known
tenure system. It must be mentioned here that

546

Indian Polity

ir respective of th e ir division among different
states, each of these All-I n dia Services form a
singl e serv ice with commo n rights and statu s

and uniform scales of pay th roughout the
co untry. All the th ree All-India Services are
Class-I (Grou p-A ) Services.
The All-India Services have t hree categories. They are:
• Supe r time sca le
• Seni or sca le
• Junior sca le
In the beginning, the officers are appointed
in the junior sca le. In the course of time, they
a re pla ced in t he sen ior sca le a nd the super
tim e scale.
The three All-India Services a re managed
and co n t roll ed by three different Ministries
of th e Ce ntra l Gove rnment. They a re:
• lAS by the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grieva nces a nd Pensions
• IPS by the Ministry of Ho me Affairs
• IFoS by the Mini stry of Enviro n me n t,
Forest and Clim ate Chan ge
It must be mentioned here that the AIIInd ia Serv ices are co ntroll ed j oi ntl y by the
Centra l a nd state governm e nts. The ultim ate
control lies with t he Ce ntral Government
while th e imm ed iate co n trol vests with the
sta te governm e nts. Their sa laries and pe nsions are met by the states. However, the
disciplin ary action ( imposition of pe nalties)
against these officers ca n o nly be taken by
t he Ce n tra l gove rnm e nt.
Presently, there a re twenty-six state cadres
in all for the All-India Serv ices. T his includes
two joint cadres - ( i) Assam-Meghalaya and
(ii) Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Mizoram and the
Uni o n Terri tories (AGMUT).

Central Services
The personnel of Ce ntral Se rvices wo rk
under the exclusive j uri sdi ct ion of the Ce ntral Gove rnm ent. They man sp ecia li se d
(fun ct ion a l a nd tec hni ca l) positions in va rious departments of the Centra l Governm e nt.
Most of them are co ntroll ed and man aged
by their respective ministri es / de partments,
whil e a few of them are co ntrolled and

ma naged by the Mi ni st ry of Perso nn e l. It
(M ini stry of Personnel) a lso determines t he
general poli cies perta inin g to all the Ce ntra l
Services. In fact, the Mi ni stry of Personnel is
t he ce ntra l personnel agency in th e Gove rnm e n t of Indi a.
Befo re ind e p e nd e n ce, th e Central Services were c la ss ified into Class I, Class II ,
Sub o rd inate a nd Inferio r serv ices. After
ind ep e nden ce, the nomenclature of Subordinate and Infe ri or Services was replaced by
Class III and Cla ss IV Serv ices on the recommendat io n of the First Pay Commiss io n
( 194 6- 1947). Again in 1974, the classificatio n of Ce n tra l Se rvices in to Class I, Class II,
Class III and Class IV was cha nged to Grou p A,
Group B, Grou p C and Group D, respective ly.
This was done on the recommendation of the
Third Pay Com mi ss ion (1970-] 973). Thus, as
of now, the Ce ntra] Se rvi ces are classified into
four categories. They are:
• Centra l Serv ices, Grou p A
• Central Serv ices, Group B
• Ce n tra l Services, Grou p C
• Central Se rvices, Group D
T he number of Group A Ce n tra l services
has been increasing over the years. At present,
there a re 66 Group A Central Services. So me
of them are li sted below:
1. Indian Foreign SeTvice
2. Indi a n P&T Accounts a nd Fi nance Service
3. Indian Posta l Se rvice
4 . Indi a n Ra ilway Acco unts Se rvice
5. Indi a n Railway Perso nn el Serv ice
6. Indi a n R..:1ilway naffic Se rvice
7. Indian Audit a nd Accounts Se rvice
8 . Indi a n In for mation Serv ice
9. Indian Defen ce Acco unts Se rvice
10. Indi a n Civil Acco unts Se rvice
11 . Indian Revenue Serv ice ( In co m e Thx)
12. Indi a n Revenue Service (Custo ms &
Indirect Thxes)
13 . In dia n Railway Serv ice of Mechanical
En gineers
14. Indi a n Railway Se rvice of Electrical
Eng ineers
15. Indian Railway Serv ice of Engin eers
16 . India n Thleco mmuni catio n Se rvice
J 7. Indian Trade Service

Public Services

18. India n Defen ce Estates Service
19. Indi an Supply Service
20. Indi an Inspection Service
21. Central Hea lth Service
22. Indian Railway Medi cal Service
23. Indian Ordnance Factories Health Service
24. Indi an Eco nomic Service
25 . Indian Statistical Service
26 . Indi an Cost Accounts Service
27. Defence Quality Assurance Service
28. Indian Legal Service
29. Indian Corporate Law Service
30. Ce ntral Labour Service
Most of the above cadres of Group A Central
Services have also corresponding Group B Ser·
vices. The Group C Central Services consists of
clerical personnel while Group D consists of
manual personnel. Thus Group A and Group B
comprises of gazetted officers while Group C
and Group Dare non.gazetted Class.
It must also b e mentioned h ere that the
Indi an Foreign Service ( IFS) is the top most
Ce ntral Service in terms of prestige, status,
pay and emoluments. In fact, it (though a
Central Service) co mpetes with the All·India
Services in position , status a nd p ay scales. It
comes n ext to the lAS in ranking and its pay
scale is higher than the IPS. It is managed by
the Ministry of External Affairs. Its recruits
serve the Indian mi ss io n s a nd embassies
a broad.

State Services
The personnel of state services work under
the exclusive jurisdiction of the state govern·
m en t. They h old different positions (ge nera l,
functional and technical) in the de part.
me nts of the state government. However, they
occupy lower positio ns ( in the administrative
h ierarchy of the state) than th ose held by the
m embers of the all·Jn di a services ( lAS, IPS
and IFoS).
The number of services in a state differ
from state to state. The services that are com·
m an to all the states are:
I . Civil Servi ce,
2. Police Service.
3. Forest Service.

4 . Agricultural Service.

~ 547

5. Medical Service.
6. Veterinary Service.
7. Fisheries Service.
8. Judicial Servi ce.
9. Public Health Service.
10. Educational Service.
11 . Co·operlltive Service.
12. Registration Service.
13 . Sales Thx Service.
14. Ja il Service.
15. Service of Engineers.
Each of these services is named after the
state, that is, name of the state is added as a
prefix. Amo ng all th e state serv ices, th e civil
service (also kn own as the administrative
serv ice) is the m ost prestigious.
Like the Central serv ices, the sta te serv ices
are also classified into four categories: class I
(group I or group A), class II (group II or
group B), class III (group III or group C) and
class IV (group IV or group D) .
Further, the state services are also classified into gazetted class and non-gazetted class.
Usually, Class 1 (Group-A) and Class-II (Group-B)
Services are gazetted classes while Class-III
(G roup·C) a nd Class·IV (Group·D) services
are non-gazetted classes. The names of the
m embers of gazetted class are published in the
Government Gazette for appoi ntment, tra nsfer,
pro motion a nd retirement, wh ile those of the
non-gazetted are not publish ed. Further, the
members of the gazetted class enjoy so me
privileges which are denied to the members of
non-gazetted class. Also, the members of the
gazetted class are call ed 'officers' while those
of non-gazetted a re called 'employees'.
The All-India Se rv ices Act of 1951 specifies
that se nior posts n ot exceedi ng thi rty-three
and one third per ce nt in the Indian Administra tive Service ( lAS), Indian Police Service
( IPS) and Indian Forest Se rvi ce ( IFoS) are
required to b e filled in by promotion of officers employed in the state services. Such promotion s are made on the recommendation
of selection committee co n stituted for this
purpose in each state. Such a committee is
presided over by the Cha irm a n or a m ember
of UPSC.

548 ,(/ Indian Polity
~ CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
Articl es 308 to 3] 4 in part XIV of the Constitution conta in provision s with regard to a ll-India
serv ices, Ce ntral se rvices and state services.

II I Recruitment and Service Conditions
•

Article 309 e mpowe rs the Parl iame nt and th e
state legis latures to regu late the rec rui tm ent
and t he condition s of service of the perso ns
appo inted to public se rvices and posts under
the Cen t re a nd the sta tes, respective ly. Un ti l
such laws a rc made, the President or the governor can make rules to reg ulate th ese matters.
Recruitment includes any method provided
for inducting a person in publi c se rv ice like
a ppointm ent, se lection, deputatio ll , promot ion and appointme n t by tran sfer.
The cond itions of service of a pub lic serva n t
includes pa y, a llowan ces, periodi ca l in crements, leave, promot io n, tenure or termination of se rvice, tran sfer, de putation, var io us
types of rights, di sci plin ary act ion , holidays,
hours of wo rk and retirem ent be nefits li ke
pen sion, provident fund, g rat uity a nd so on.
Unde r thi s provision, the Pa rl ia ment or
the state leg islature can impose 'rea sonab le'
restri ct ions on the Fu ndame n ta l Rights of
public se rvants i n th e interests of in tegrity,
ho nesty, efficien cy, d isc ip lin e, impartiality,
sec recy, n eutrality, anonymity, devo tio n to
duty and so o n. Such restri ct io ns are mentio ned in t h e condu c t rule s li ke Centra l
Services (Conduct) Ru les, Rai lway Services
(Co nd uct) Rules and so o n .

Pli

Tenure of Office (Doctrine
of Pleasure)

Acco rding to Article 3]0, members of the
defen cc se rv ices, the c ivil se rvices of the
Ce ntTe and t he a ll -Ind ia services or perso ns
holdi ng mi l itary posts or civi l posts 2 under
2A 'civil post' mean s an appointment or office or
employment on the civil side of the administration
,IS dist ingui shed from lhe military side.

th e Ce ntre, hold office during the pl easure of
the Pres ide n t. Simila rly, membe rs of t he civil
se rvices of a state or pe rso ns ho ldin g civil
posts und e r a state, ho ld office duri ng the
plea sure of the governor of th e state.
Howeve r, there is an exception to this general rul e of di sm issal at pleasure. The Preside nt or the governor may ( in o reler to secure
the se rvices of a person havi ng special qua lificat ion s) provide for the payment of compe nsation to him / h er in two cases: ( i) if the post
is a bo li shed before the expiration of the co ntra ctua l period, or ( ii ) if he/s he is required to
vacate that post for rea sons not con nected with
misco nduct on his/her part. Notably, such a
con tract ca n be made only with a new entrant,
that is, a pe rso n who is not a lready a member of a defence serv ice, a civil serv ice of the
Centre, an a ll- India service or a civil servi ce
of a state.

II ISafeguards to Civil Servants
Article 311 places two restrictions o n the above
'doctrine of pleasure '. In othe r words, it provides two sa feg uards to c ivil se rva nts agai'nst
any arbitrary dism issa l from their posts:
(a) A c ivil se rva nt ca nnot be di smi ssed o r
re moved 3 by a n authority subordinate
to that by wh ich he/she was appointed.
(b) A civil serva nt cannot be d is mi ssed or
removed or reduced in rank except afte r
a n in qu iry in wh ich he/she has been
informed of the charges against him /
her and given a reasonab le opportunity of being heard i n respect of those
charges.
Th e above two safeguards are available
only to the membe rs of the civ il se rvi oes of
the Centre, the a ll -In dia services, the civil
services of a state or to perso ns holding c ivil
posts under th e Centre or a state and no t to
l-rhe difference between di sm issa l and removal
is that the rormer disqua lifies for futu re employment under the government whil e t he latte r does
not disquali fy ror future employment under ~h c
govern ment.

Public Services

the members of defence services or persons
holding military posts.
However, the second safeguard (holding
inquiry) is not available in the following
three cases:
( a) Where a civil servant is dismissed or
removed or reduced in rank on the
ground of conduct which has led to his/
her co nviction on a criminal charge; or
(b) Where the authority empowered to di smiss or remove a civil servant or to
reduce him / her in rank is satisfied that
for some reason (to be recorded in writing), it is not reasonably practicable to
hold such inquiry; or
( e) Where the President or the governor is
satisfied that in the interest of th e security of the state, it is not expedient to
hold such inquiry.
Originally, the opportunity of being heard
was given to a civil servant at two stages-at
the inquiry stage, and at the punishment
stage. But, the 42nd Amendment Act of 1976
abolished the provision for second opportunity (that is, the right of a civil servant
to make representation against the punishment proposed as a resu lt of the findings of
the inquiry). Hence, the present position is
that where it is proposed (a fter inquiry) to
impose upon a civil servant the punishment
of dismissal, removal or reductio n in rank, it
may be imposed on the basis of the evidence
adduced at the inquiry without giving him /
her any opportunity of making represen tation on the penalty proposed.
The Supreme Court h eld that the expression 'reasonable opportunity of being heard'
envisaged to a civil servant (i n the second
safeguard mentioned above) includes:
(a) an opportunity to deny his/ her guilt and
establish his/ h er innocence which he/
she ca n only do if he/ she is told what
the charges levell ed against him / her
are and the a11egations on which such
charges are based;
(b) an opportunity to defend him se lf!
herself by cross-examining the witnesses

~ 549

produced against him/ her and by examining himself/ herself or any other witnesses in support of his/ her defen ce; and
(e) the disciplinary authority must supply a
copy of the inquiry officer's report to the
delinquent civil servant for observations
and comments before the disciplinary
authority con siders the report.

II IAll-India Services
Article 312 makes the following provisions in
respect of all-India services:
(a) Th e Parliament ca n create newall-India
serv ices (including an all-India judicial
servi ce), if the Rajya Sabha passes a
resolution declaring that it is necessary
or expedient in th e national interest to
do so. Such a resolution in the Rajya
Sabha should be supported by two-thirds
of the me mbers present and voting. This
power of recommendation is given to
the Rajya Sabha to protect the interests
of states in the Indian federal system .
(b) Parliament can regulate the recruitme nt a nd con ditions of service of persons apPOinted to all-India serv ices.
Accordingly, the Parliament has enacted
the All-India Services Act, 1951 for the
purpose.
(e) The se rvices known at the co mm ence m e nt of the Co n st itution (t h at
is, January 26, 1950) as the Indian
Administrative Service and the Indian
Poli ce Service are deemed to be se rvices created by Parliament under this
provisio n.
(d) The all-India judicial service shou ld not
include any post inferior to that of a
distri ct judge. A law provid ing for the creation of this service is not to be dee med
as an amendment of the Constitution for
the purposes of Article 368.
Though the 42nd Amendment Act of 1976
made the provision for the creation of a11India judicial service, no such law has been
made so far.

550

f!

Indian Pality

El lOther Provisions
Article 312A (i nserted by the 28th Amendmen t
Act of 1972) confers powers on the Parliament
to vary or revoke the co nditi ons of service of
persons who were a ppointed to a civil service
of th e Crown in India before 1950. Artide 3 13
dea ls with transitiona l provisions and says that
Table 74.1

until otherwise provided, a ll the laws in force
before 1950 and app licable to any public se rvice would continue. Article 314 which made
prov ision for protection of ex isting officers
of certa in services was repealed by the 28t h
Amendmen t Act of 1972.

Articles Related to Public Services at a Glance

,

Article No.

Subject-matter

308.

I nte rp re~
"~
ti;;
o"
;;,...__

30 9.

Recruitment and conditions of service of persons serving the Union or a slate

310.

Tenure of office of persons serving the Union or a state

31 1.

Dismissal, removal or reductlon In rank of persons employed in civil capacities under the Union
or a state

31 2.

All-India Services

312A.

Power of Parliament to vary or revoke conditions of service of officers of certain services

3 13.

Transitional provisions

314.

Provision for rotectlon of existing officers of certain services (Repeale

,
i,

,
•

,

CHAPTER

A

rticles 294 to 300 in Part XlI of the
Constitution deal with the property,
contracts, rights, liabilities, obligations and suits of the Union and the states.
In this regard, the Constitution makes the
Union or the states as juristic (legal) persons.

PROPERTY OF THE UNION
AND THE STATES

a I Succession
A'll property and assets that were vested in the
Dominion of India or a province or an Indian
princely state, before the commencement of
the present Constitution, became vested in
the Union or the corresponding state.
Similarly, all rights, li abilities and obligations of the government of the dominion of
India or a province or an Indian state would
now be the rights, liabilities and obligations
of the Government of India or the corresponding state.

fl iEscheat, Lapse and Bona Vacantia
Any property in India that would have accrued
to the King of England or ruler of the Indian
state (princely) by escheat (death of a person
inte-state without any heir), lapse (tennination of rights through disuse or failure to fol.low appropriate procedures) or bona vacantia
(property found without any owner) for want
of a rightful owner, would now vest in the state
if the property is situated there, and in the
Union, in any other case. In al1 these three

Rights and
Liabilities of the
Government
cases, the property accrues to the government
as there is no rightful owner (claimant).

g ISea-Wealth
All lands, minerals and other things of value
under the waters of the ocean within the
territorial waters of India, the continental
shelf of India and the exclusive economic zone
of India vests in the Union. Hence, a state
near the ocean cannot claim jurisdiction over
these things.
India's territorial waters extend to a distance of 12 nautical miles from the appropriate baseline. Similarly, India's exclusive
economic zone extends upto 200 nautical
miles l .

El lCompulsory Acquisition by Law
The Parliament as well as the state legislatures are empowered to make laws for the
compulsory acquisition and requisitioning
of private property by the governments. Further, the 44th Amendment Act (1978) has also
abolished the constitutional obHgation to pay
compensation in this regard except in two
cases: (a) when the government acquires the
property of a minority educational institution; and (b) when the government acquires
the land held by a person under his personal
lUnder the Thrritorial Waters, Continental Shelf,
Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime
Zones Act, 1976, passed by the Parliament after the
40th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1976.

552

jJ Ind;an Polity

c ultiva tion and th e land is within the statu·
tory ce ilin g limits2,

II IAcquisition under Executive Power
The Union or a state ca n acquire, ho ld and
dispose of property under the exercise of its
executive power.
Further, the executive power of the Union

or a state extends to the ca rryi ng on any trade

or busin ess within and in other S!..,l tes a lso.

SUITS BY OR AGAINST
THE GOVERNMENT
Articl e 300 of the Co nstitution deals wit h the
su its by or against the Governme nt in India.
It Jays down t hat the Government of India
may sue or be sued by the na me of th e Un ion

of Ind ia and government of a state may sue

(wrongs com mitted by its servants) in respect
of its sovereign function s. This is exp la ined in
de tail as follows:

o

J Liability for Contracts

Under the exercise of its executive power, the
Union or a state can e nter into contracts for
the acq ui sition, holding a nd disposal of property, or to ca rryo n any trade or business, o r
for any other purpose. But, the Constitution
lays down three condit io ns which must be
fulfilled by suc h co ntra c ts:
(a) They must be expressed to be made by
the pres ident or governor, as t he case
may be;
(b) They must be executed o n behalf of the
pres ident or governor, as the case may
bc; and
(c) They mu st be executed by sllch a person
or in such a mann er as the pres ident or
gove rn or may direc t or a uthorise.
These conditions are mandatory and not
merel y directo ry in nature. Failurc to comply
with them nullifi es the co ntra cts and re nd ers
th e m vo id and unenforceab le in the co urts.
Fu rth e r, the president o r t h e governor
is not personally liabl e in respec t of any
contract exec uted in his nam e. Similarly.
the officer executing t h e contract is a lso
not personally liab le. This imm uni ty is
purely perso nal and docs nOt immunize the
government from co ntractual liability, mak·
ing the govern me nt suable in co ntra cts. This
means that the contractual liability of the
Union government a nd the state governments
is the same as that of 8 n indi vidual under the
ordi nary law of co ntra ct, which has been tbe
pos it ion in Indi a since the days of the East
Ind ia Company.

o r be sued by the na me of that sta te, cg, State
of Andhra Pradesh or State of Uttar Pradesh
and so on. Thus, th e Union of India and states
'Ire lega l entities Uuristi c persona li t ies) for
purposes of suits and proceedin gs, not th e
Government of the Union or t he gove rnment
of states.
Regarding the extent of the governmenta l
liabili ty, the Co nstitution (Article 300) declares
that the Unio n of India or sta tes ca n sue or be
sued in relation to their respective affairs in
the like cases as the dominion of Tndia and the
corresponding provi nces or Indi an states might
have sued or bee n sued before the Constitution.
This provision is subject to any law made by
Parliament or a state legislatu re. But, no such
law ha s bee n enacted so far. Hence, at present,
the positio n in this respect remains the sa me
as it ex isted before the Co nstitution. In the
pre·Constitution period (i.e., from t he days of
the East Indi a Co mpany up to the co mmen ce·
ment of the Co nstitution in 1950), the govern·
ment was suable for co ntracts but not for torts

Pl JLiability for Torts

'l-rhe first provi sio n wa s lidded by the 44th Amendment Act ( 1978). This ame ndment abo li sh ed the
Fundamental Right to property and made it a lega l
right. The seco nd provision was adde(j by t he 17th
;\ m cndment Act (1964).

In th e beginning, the East India Co mpany was
only a trading body. Gradua ll y, it acquired
territories in India and beca me a sovereign
a uth ority. The Company was suab le for its
fun ct ion s as a trader but not as a sove reign.

I

Rights and Uabi!ities of the Government

This immunity of the Company in respect
of its sovereign functions was based on the
English Common Law maxim that the ' King
can do no wrong' , which mcans that the King
was not liable for the wrongs of hi s servants.
This traditiona l immunity of the State (i.e.,
Crown ) in Britain from any legal liability for
any action has been done away with by the
Crown Proceedings Act (1947). However, the
position in India still remains the sa me.
Therefore, th e government (U nion or
states) in India can be sued for torts (civi l
wTongs) committed by its officials only in
the exercise of its non-sovereign functio n s but
n ot in the sovereign fu nctio ns like ad mini steri ng justice, constructin g a military road,
commandeering goods during war, etc. This
distin ct io n between the sovere ign and nonsovereign functions of the Govern ment in
India and the immunity of the governme nt
in respect of its sovereign functions was established in the fa mous P and 0 Steam Navigation
Company case3 (1861). This was reaffirmed by
the Supreme Court in the post-independence
era in the Kasturilal case 4 (1964). However,
after this case, the Supreme Court started giving a restrictive interpretation of sovereign
functions of the government and awarded
compensat ion to victims in a large number
of cases.
In Nagendra Rao case 411 (1994), the Supreme
Court criticised the doctrine of sovere ign
immunity of the State and adopted a liberal
approach with respect to the tortuous liab ility
of the State. It ruled that when a citizen suffers any dam age due to the negligent act of
the serva nts of the State, the State would be
liable to pay compen sation for it and the State
cannot avoid this liabili ty on th e ground of
sovereign immunity. It held that in the modern sense, the distinction betwee n sovereign
an d non-sovereign functions does not ex ist.
l peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company
vs. Secretary ofSrate for Ind ia (1861).
"Kasrnrilal vs. State of UP (1964).
411N, Nagendra Rno & Co. vs. State of Al1dhra Pradesh
(1994).

~, 553

It laid down the proposition that barring a
few functions, the State cannot claim any
immunity. Its observations, in thi s case, are
as follows:
1. No civilised system can permit an executive to play with the people of its country and claim that it is entitl ed to act
in any manner as it is sovere ign. The
concept of public interest has changed
with structura l change in the society.
No lega l or politica l syste m today ca n
place the State above law as it is unjust
and un fair for a citizen to be deprived of
his property illega lly by negligent act of
officers of the State without any remedy.
2. The modern socia l thinking of progressive societ ies and the judicial approach is
to do away with archaic State protection
and place the State or the Govern ment at
par with any oth er juristic legal entity.
Any water-tight compartmentalisation of
the functions of the State as "sovereign"
and "no n-sove re ign~ or "gove rnme ntal"
and "non-governmental" is not sound.
It is contra ry to modern jurisprudential
thinking.
3. The need of the State, the duty of its
officia ls and right of the citizens are
requi red to be reconciled so that the rule
of law in a welfare State is not shaken.
In a welfare State, the functions of the
State are n ot only the defen ce of the
co untry o r admi ni stration of justice
or maintaining law and order but it
extends to regulating and co ntrolling the
activities of the people in almost every
sphere-education al , commercial, social,
eco nom ic, political a nd even marital
4. The demarcating line between sovereign
and non-sovereig n powers for which no
rational basis survives has largely disappeared. Therefore, barring functions such
as administration of justice, maintenance
of law and order a nd repression of crime
etc., which are among the primary and
in ali enable functions of a con stitutiona l
Governwent, the State ca nnot claim a ny
immunity.

554

,( f Indian Polity

fn t he above case, the Supre m e Court did
not overru le its judgeme nt in the Kastuyifal
case ( 1964). However, it sa id that it is appli·
cabl e to rare a nd limited cases.
In Com m on Cau se case 4b (1999), t h e
Suprem e Court again exa mi ne d th e whole
doctrin e and rejected the sovere ign immunity rul e. The Court he ld that th e rule of
State liability as lai d down in P and 0 Steam
Navigation Company case is very outmoded.
It said tha t in modern tim es when th e State
activities have bee n cons id e rabl y increased
it is very difficu lt to draw a lin e between its
sovereign a nd non -sovereign functions. T he
in creased activities of the State have made
a deep impressio n on a ll facets of citizen s'
life, and the refore, the liability of the State
must be made co-exte nsive with the modern
con ce pt of a welfa re State. T h e State must be
li able for a ll tortuous acts of its employees,
whether don e in exercise of sovere ign or nonsove re ign powers"c. Finally, the court observed
that the efficacy of Kasturilal case as a binding precedent has been eroded .
In th e Prisoner's Murder case"d (2000),
the Supreme Court rul ed that in the process
of judicial a dvance ment Kasturilal case has
p aled in to insignificance and is no lon ger of
any bindin g valu e.

j

SUITS AGAINST PUBLIC
OFFICIALS

oI

President and Governor

The Co n st itutio n confe rs certa in immuni ties to the preside nt of Indi a and governor
of states with rega rd to their officia l acts and
perso nal acts. T hese are:
(a) Official Acts T he president a nd the governors ca nn ot be sued during the te rm of th ei r
office or thereafter, for a ny act done by them
4bCommOll Cause, Registered Society vs. Union of I"dia
(1999).
4<:J .N. Pa ndey, Tile COll stitutional Law of ind ia, 49th
Edition, Central Law Agency, p. 682.
4dState of A.P. vs. Cludla Rarnkrishna Reddy (2000).

in th e exercise and performance of their officia l powers a nd duties. Howeve r, the official
conduct of the president ca n be reviewed by a
co urt, tribuna l or any other body authorised
by either House of Parliament to investigate charges for impe.:1.chment. Further, the
aggrieved p erso n can bring a ppropriate proceedings against the Un ion of India instead
of the president and the state in stead of the
Gove rnor of that state.
(b) Personal Acts No cri min a l proceedings
can be started against the president and t he
governors in respect of their perso na l acts
n or ca n they be arrested o r imprisoned. T h is
im m u n ity is l imited to the period of the
te rm of th eir office o nly and does not exte nd
beyo nd that. However, civil proceed ings can
be started against th em during the ir term of
office in respect of t heir perso nal acts after
giving two months' a dvance noti ce.

PI /Ministers
The Constituti on does not g rant any immun ity to t he mini sters for their offic ia l acts.
But, sin ce they are not required to countersign
(as in Brita in) the official acts of th e p resident a nd t he gove rnors, they are not lia bl e
i n the co urts for th ose acts 5 . Moreover, th ey
are not I iable for the officia l acts done by the
president and the governors on the ir advice as
the courts arc debarred fro m inquiri ng into
such a dvice. However, the ministers do not
enjoy a ny immuni ty for their person a l acts,
and ca n be sued for c r imes as weB as torts
in the ordinary courts like co mmon citize n s.

g /Jud icial Officers
The judicial officers enjoy immunity from
any li ability in respect of their officia l acts
and he nce, ca n not be sued. The Judicia l Offi~
cers Protection Act ( 1850) lays down that, ' no
judge, magistrate, justice of peace, co llector or
other person act ing judicially shall be Hable
the ministers are required to counters ign
the official acts of the crown and are held liable in
the courts for those 'ICts.

5 1n Br ita in,

Rights and Liabilities

to be sued in any civil court for any act done
by him in the discharge of his official duty'.

II ICivil Servants
Under the Constitution, the civil servants
are conferred personal immunity from legal
liability for official contracts. This means that
the civil serva,nt who made a contract in his
official capacity is not personally liable in
respect of that contract but it is the government (Central or state) that is liable for the
contract. But, if the contract is made without
compJying the conditions spec ified in the
Con stitution, then the civil servant who made
the contra;ct is personally liable. Further, the
civil sen'ants also enjoy immunity from lega l
liability for their tortious acts in respect of
the sovereign functions of the government. In
other cakes, the liability of the civ il senrants
for torts or illegal acts is the same as of any
Table 75.1
Article No.

or the Government

555

ordinary citizen. Civil proceedings can be
instituted against them for anything done
in their official capacity after giving a two
months' advance notice. But, no such notice
is required when the actio!! is to be brought
against them for the acts done outside the
scope of their official duties. Criminal proceedings can be in stituted against them for
acts done in their official capacity, with the
prior permission of the president or the governor, where necessarl·
6Crimina l Procedure Code says-where a public
servant who is not removable from his office save
by or with the sanction of the Central or state
government is accused of an offence, committed
by him wh ile acting or purporting to act in the
discharge of his official duty, no court can take
cognizance of such offence without the previous
sanction of the Central government or the state
government, as the case may be.

Articles Related to Rights and liabilities of the Government at a Glance
Subject-matter

":94.

Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations in certain cases

295.

Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations in other cases

296.

Property accruing by escheat or lapse or as bona vacantia

297.

Thi;'lgs of value within territorial waters or continental shelf and resources of the exclusive economic
lOne to vestln the Union

298.

Power to carry on trade, etc.

299.

Contracts

300.

Suits and proceedings

361.

Protection (immunities) of President and Governors

CHAPTER

16

RATIONALE OF SPECIAL
PROVISIONS
In order to realise the objectives of equality
and justice as laid down in the Prea mble, the
Constitution makes special provisions for the
scheduled castes (SCs), the scheduled tribes
(SIS), the backward classes (BCs) and the AngloIndians. These specia l provisions are contained
in P~l rt XV I of the Constitution from Articles
330 to 342A. They arc related to the following:
1. Rese rvat io n in Legi sla tures
2. Special Representation in Legislatures
3. Reservation in Services and Posts
4. Educa tional Gran ts
5. Appointment of Nationa l Comm issions
6. Appointment of Com mi ssio ns of
Investigation
These special provisions ca n he classified
into the foll owing broad ca tegories:
(a) Permane nt and Temporary - Some of
them are a perman e nt feature of the
Constitution, while so me others continue
to operate only for a specified period.
(b) Protect ive and Developmenta l - Some
of the m aim at protecting these classes
from a ll forms of injustice and exp loitation, while so me ot he rs aim at promoting their socio-eco nomi c interests.

t SPECIFICATION OF CLASSES
The Constitution does not specify the castes or
tribes which arc to be ca lled the SCs or the S'Th.
Il leaves to th e Pres ident the power to specify
as to what castes or tribes in eac h state and
union territory are to be treated as the SCs and

Special Provisions
Relating to Certain
Classes
STs. Th us, the lists of the SCs or STs vary from
state to state and union te rritory to union territory. In case of the states, the President issues
the notifi catio n after co nsulti ng the governor
of the sta te co nce rned. But, any inclusion or
excl usion o f any caste or tribe from Pres idential notifi ca tion ca n be done only by the Parli a me nt a nd not by a subsequent Presiden tial
noti ficat ion. Presi de nts have issued sever-a I
orders specify ing the SCs and STh in di fferent
states and union territories a nd these have also
1
been amended by the Parlia ment.
Si mil a rl y, the co nstitution has not specified the classes of citizens who a re to b e
ca ll ed the socia ll y a nd edu ca tionall y backward classes, also known as Other Backwa rd
Classes (O BCs), Th e J02nd Amend ment Act
of 2018 provided that the Pres ident may with
respect to a ny state or union territory specify
the socia ll y and educationally ba c kward
classes whi ch shall for the purposes of the
co nstitutio n be deemed to be socially and
educationall y backward classes in relation to
that state or union te rritory. Late r, the 100th
Amendment Act of 2021 modified the above
provision by providing that the Presiden t may
with respect to any state or union territory
are the Co nstitution (Scheduled Castes)
Order, 1950; the Constitution (Scheduled castes)
(U nion Thrrito ries) Order, 1951; the Constitution
(Scheduled ltibcs) Order, 1950; the Constitution
(Scheduled ltibes) (U nion Thrritories) Order, 1951
and so on. The Parliamen t modified the Presidential
orders by enacting th e Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendme nt) Act in 1956,
in 1976 and in the subseque nt years.

l These

Special Provisions Relating to Certain

specify the sociall y and educationally backward classes in the Central List which sha ll
for the purposes of the ce ntral government be
deemed to be socially and educationally backward classes in relation to that state or union
territory. In case of a state, the P.resident
issues the notifi cation after consultation with
t h e governor of the state concerned. But, any
i nclusion in or exclusion from the Central
List of socially and educationall y backward
classes specifi~d in a Presidential notification can be done only by the Parliament and
not by a subsequent Presidenti~l notification 2 • The 105th Amendment Act of 2021 also
explained that the expression "Central Li st~
means the list of sociall y a nd ed ucationall y
backward classes prepared and maintained by
and for the central government.
Further, the 105th Amendment Act of
2021 empowered a state or union territory to
prepare and maintain a list of socially and
educationally backward classes for its own
purposes. The entries in a State List or Union
Thrritory List m ay be different from the Central List. However, this can be done by a state
or union territory only by law.
Un like in the case of SCs, S15 and OBCs,
the Constitution has defined the perso ns
who belong to the AnglO-Indian commun ity.
Accordingly, 'an AnglO-Indian means a person whose father or any of whose other male
progenitors in the male line is or was of European descent but who is domiciled within the
territory of India and is or was born within
such territory of parents habitually resident
therein and not established there for temporary purposes only'.

SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR SC.
AND ST.
1. Reservation/or SCs and STs in Legislatures:
5eats are to be reserved for the 5Cs
and STh in the Lok Sabha and the state
1-hc 102nd Amendment Act of 2018 inserted
a new Article 342A in the co nstitution. Later,
this Article (342A) was amended by th e 105th
Amendment Act of.2021.

Classes .~ 557

legislative assemblies on the basis of
population ratios.
Originally, this provision of reservation
was to operate for ten years (i.e., up to
1960) only. But, this duration has been
extended continuously since then by ten
years each time. Now, under the J04th
Amendment Act of 2019, this provision
of reservation is to last until 2030. 3
2. Claims ofSCs and STs to Services and Posts:
The claims of the 5Cs and 5Th are to be
taken into cons ideration while making
appo in tments to the public services
of the Centre and the states, without
sacrificing the efficiency of administration. However, the 82nd Amendment
Act of 2000 provides for making of any
provision in favour of th e 5Cs and 515
for relaxation in qualifying marks in
any examination or loweri ng the standards of eval uati on, for reservation
in matters of promotion to the public
services of the Centre and the states.
3. National Commissions for SCs and STs:
The President shou ld set up a National
Commission for the SCs to investigate
all matters relating to the constitutional
safeguards for the SCs and to report to
him/her (Article 338). Similarly, the
President shou ld also set up a National
Commission for the 515 to investigate
all matters relating to the Constitutional
safeguards for the 515 and to report to
him/ h er (Article 338-A). The President
should place all such reports before
the Parliament, along with the action
taken memorandum. Previously, the
Constitution provided for a combined
National Commission for 5Cs and
515. The 89th Amendment Act of 2003
:>rhe 8th Amendment Act of 1959 extended the period
of ten years to twenty years, the 23rd Amendment
Act of 1969 to thirty years, the 45th Amendment Act
of 1980 to forty years, the 62nd Amendment Act of
1989 to fifty years, the 79th Amendment Act of ]999
to sixty years, the 95th .Amendment Act of 2009 to
seventy years and the 104th Amelldmellt Act of 2019
to eighty years, that is, until the year 2030.

558

,€, Indian Polity

bifurcated th e combined comm iss ion
into two separa te bodi cs.
4. Control ofthe Union oyer the Administration
of Scheduled Areas and the Welfare of STs:
The President is required to appoinl a
commiss ion to report o n th e admini stration of the schedul ed areas a nd the
welfare of th e STs in the states. He can
appoi n t such a com mi ss ion at a ny tim c
but compu lsori ly after ten years of the
c omme n ce m ent of the Con stituti o n.
He nce, a commissio n was appo in ted
in the year ]960. It lva s headed by U.N .
Dhebar and submitted its report in 1961.
After four decades, the second commiss ion wa s a pPoi n ted in 2002 under th e
chai rm anship of Dili p Singh Sh ur ia. It
submitted its re port in 2004.
Furthe r, the executive powe r of the
Ce ntre extends to th e givi ng of direction s to a state with respect to th e drawing up and execution of sc hemes for th e
welfare of th e S1's in the state.

~ SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR BC.
1. National Commission for BCs : Th e
National Commi ssion for BCs was setup in 1993 by an Ac t of Parliamen t.
Late r, th e 102nd Am e ndm e n t Ac t of
2018 conferred a constitutio nal statu s
on the commiss ion. For thi s purpose,
th e am e ndment in serted a ne w Article
338-B in t he constitution. Accordin gly,
the Pres ide nt shou ld set-up a Na ti o nal
Commissio n for the SOC iall y a n d edu catio na ll y BCs to in vestigat e a ll matte rs
re la tin g to the con stitutional safeguards
fo r th e soc ia ll y a nd educa tionall y BCs
and to re port to him / he r. Th e Pres ide nt
should pla ce a ll such reports before the
Parl iam e nt , a long with the action ta ken
m e mora ndum.
2. Appointmentof a Commission to Investigate
the Conditions ofBCs: Th e Preside nt may
appoi nt a com mi ssion to investigate th e
conditions of soc ia lly a nd edu cati o nall y
ba ckward classes a nd to reco mm e nd th e

ste ps to improve th ei r conditio n . The
report of the commissio n 's to be pla ced
be fore the Parli a ment, a lo ng with action
taken memorandum.
Under the above provision , the President
has appo in ted two comm ission s so far.
The first backward classes commission
was a ppoin ted in 1953 u nder th e cha ir.
ma nship of Kaka Kn lelka r. It submitted
its report in 1955. But, no action was
take n on it as the reco mm endations were
con side red to be too vague and ;mpractica l and also the re waS a sharp division
a mong the members on the criterion of
backwardness.
Th e second Backward Classes Co mmi ss io n was appo inted in 1979 with
B.P. Manda I as c hairman. It submitted
its report in 1980 . lts rccomm e nda ·
ti o n s we re al so lying unattended till
1990 whe n the V.P. Singh Gove rnment
declared rese rvation of 27 perce nt governm e nt jobs for the OBes.

I

SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR
ANGLO-INDIANS
I . Special Representation for Anglo-Indians in

Legislatures : Befo re 2020, the Presiden t
nominated two m e mb e rs from the
Ang lO-Ind ia n c om mu n ity to the Lok
Sa bha, if the community was not adequate ly represente d. Simi la rl y, before
2020 , t h e govern o r of a s t ~lte also
nominat e d o n e memb e r from th e
AnglO- Indian co mmuni ty to the State
Legisla ture Assembly, if t he communi ty
wa s not adequate ly represented.
Ori ginall y, thi s prov isio n of special
representati o n was to operate for ten
years ( i.e., upto 1960 ) on ly. But, thi s
durati o n ha s bee n ext e nded contin uou sl y s i n ce t h en by ten years ea c h
t im e. Th e last extension upto 2020 wa s
m a d e by th c 95 th A m e ndm e nt Ac t,
2009. Howevcr, th e 104th Am e ndm e nt
Act , 2019, has not exte nded furth e r the
ope ra tion of th is provi s ion. In oth e r

I.

Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes

words, the Amendment di sco ntin ued
this provision of special representation
of the Anglo·lndian com munity in the
Legislatures (Lok Sabha and Assembly)
by nominati on . Consequently, thi s provision ceased to have effect on the 25th
January, 2020.
2. Speci al Provision in Services and
Educational Gran ts for Anglo -Indians:
Before independen ce, certain posts were
rese rved for the Anglo·lndians in the
railway, customs, postal and telegraph
services of the Union. Similarly, the
Anglo·lndian educationa l insti tu tion s
were given certain spec ial grants by
the Centre and the states. Both th ese
benefits we r e a llowed to co ntinu e
under the co nstitution on a progressive

559

diminution basis and finally ca me to an
end in 1960.
3. National Co mmission for SCs vis -avis Anglo -In di an s: The Na tiona l
Co mmission for SCs is also required to
di scharge similar fun ctions with rega rd
to the Anglo·lndi a n co mmunity as it
does with respect to the SCs. In other
words, the co mmission has to investigate
all matters relating to the Constitutional
and other legal safeguards for the Anglo·
Indian community and report to the
President upon their working. 4
4Clause 10 of Article 338 reads as follows: -In this
article, referencc to the Scheduled Castes shall be
construed as including references to the Anglo-India n community-.

Table 76.1

Articles Related to Special Provisions for Certain Classes at a Glance

.l.rtl(le No

SubJect·matter

330

Reservation of seats for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes In the House of the people

331

Representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the House of the people

332

Reservation of seats for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in the legislative assemblies of the states

333

Representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the legislative assemblies of the states

334

Reservation of seats and special representation to cease after certain period

335

Claims of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes to services and posts

336

Special provision for Anglo-Indian community In certain services

337

Special provision with respect to educational grants for the benefit of Anglo-Indian community.

338

National Commission for scheduled castes

338A

National Commission for SCheduled tribes

3388

National Commission for backward classes
Control of the Union over the administration of scheduled areas and the welfare of scheduled tribes

340

Appointment of a commission to investigate the conditions of backward classes

341

Scheduled castes

342

Schedu led tribes

342A

SOCially and educationally backward classes

- --

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ._ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __ _ _

,.

CHAPTER

7i1

A

rticles 371 to 37 1-J in Part XX I of the
co nstitution co ntai n spe c ial provis ion s for twelve states 1 viz., Mahara sh tra, Gujarat, Naga lan d, Assam, Manipur,
Andhra Pradesh, Thlangana, Sikkim, Mizoram,
Arun acha l Pradesh, Goa and Karnata ka . The
intention behind them is to m ~et th e aspirations of the people of backwa rd reg ions of the
states or to protect th e cu ltural a nd economic
interests of the tribal people of the states or to
deal with the di sturbed law and order condition in so me parts of the states or to protect
the interests of the loca l p eople of the sta tes.
Originally, the con stit ution did not make
a ny spec ial provisio ns for these states. They
have been incorporated by the va riou s subsequ e nt am endmen ts made in the co ntext of
reorganisation of the states or confe rm ent of
statehood on the Un ion Territories.

PROVISIONS FOR MAHARASHTRA
AND GUJARAT
Under Article 371, the President is authori sed
to provide that the Governor of Maharashtra
and that of Gujarat wo uld have spec ia l
responsibility fo r z:
I . the establishment of separate development
boards for (i) Vidarbha, Marathwada and
IPa rt XXI is entitled as 'Thmporary, Transitional a nd
Special Provisions'.
1-his Article was a me nded by the 7th Constitutiona l
Amendment Act of 1956 a nd the Bombay Reorganisation Act of1960. Andhra Pradesh was taken out of
thi s Art icle by the 32 nd Consti tutio nal Amendm ent
Act of ]973 and provided for separa te ly in two new
Articles 371-0 a nd 371-£.

Special Provisions
for Some States

th e rest of Ma harasht ra , (i i) Sa urashtra,
Kutc h and the rest of Guj arat;
2. mak ing a provision that a report o n the
working of these boards would be p laced
every year before th e State Legislative
Assemb ly;
3. the equi table allocation of funds for developmenta l expen di ture over the abovementioned a reas; a nd
4 . a n equitable arrangement providing
a dequate fac iliti es for technical educat ion and vocat ion a l training, a nd
adequate emp loy ment opportunities in
the state services in respect of the abovementioned areas.

t PROVISIONS FOR NAGALAND
Article 371-A makes the following spec ial
prov isions for Naga la nd 3 :
I. The Acts of Parliament relating to the
following matters wou ld not a pply to
Naga land unl ess the State Legislative
Assem bly so decides:
( i) religious or soc ial practices of the
Nagas;
(ii) Naga customa ry law and procedure;
(iii) administration ofcivit a nd criminal
justice involving decisions according to Naga custom ary law; a nd
(iv) own ersh_ip and transfer ofland and
its resources.
2. The Governor of Nagaland shall have spec ial respon sibility for law an d orde r in
1'his Article was added by the 13th Const itu ti ona l
Amendment Act of 1962.

Special Provisions for Some States

the state so long as internal disturbances
caused by the hosti le Nagas continue. In
th e discharge of this respon sibility, the
Governor, after consulting the Cou ncil
of Ministers, exercises his/ h er individual judgement and his/ h er deci sion is
fin al 4 • This special responsibiHty of the
Governor shall cease when the President
so directs.
3. The Governor has to ensure that the money
provided by the Ce ntral Governm ent
for any specific purpose is included in
the demand for a grant relating to that
purpose and not in a ny other demand
moved in the State Legislative Assembly.
4. A regional coun cil co ns ist in g of 35
m e mb e rs should be esta blish ed for
th e Thensa ng di strict of the state. Th e
Governor should make rul es fo r the
co mposition of the coun cil , mann er of
choosing its m embe rs5 , their qualifi cations, term, salaries and allowan ces; th e
procedure and conduct of business of
the council; the appointment of officers
and staff of the council and their ser-,
vi ce conditions; and any other matter
relating to the constitution and proper
fu n ctioning of the coun cil.
5. For a period of ten yea rs from the formation of NagaI and or for such further
period as the Governor may specify on
the recommendat ion of the regional
council, the following provis ions would
be operative for the Th ensa ng di stri ct:
(i) The administration of the Thensang
district shall be carried o n by the
Gove rnor.
(ii) The Governor shall in his/ her
di scretion arrange for equi tabl e
"The validity of a nything done by the Governor
shall not be called in question on the grou nd that
he/ she ought or ought not to have acted in the exercise of hi s/her individual judgeme nt.
~he Deputy Commissioner of the The nsang district
s hall be the ex-officio Chairman of the regional
coun cil and the Vice-Cha irman shall be elected
by the members of the council from amongst
themselves.

~ 561

di st ribu t io n of money provided
by the Ce ntre between Thensang
district and th e rest of Nagaland,
(iii) Any Act of Nagala nd Legislature
sh all not appl y to Thensang di stri ct unless th e Governor so directs
on th e recommendation of the
regio nal council.
(iv) The Govenlor can make Regulations
for the peace, progress a nd good
government of the Th e nsang
di st rict . Any s u ch Reg ul a tion
may repeal or amend a n Act of
Parliame nt or any other law applica ble to that district.
(v) There sha ll be a Minister for
Thensang affairs in th e State
Co uncil of Ministers. He/she is to
be appo inted from amongst th e
me mbers representing Th ensa ng
di strict in the Naga land Legislative
Assembly.
(vi) The final decision on all matters
relating to Th ensa ng distri ct shall
be made by the Govern or in hi s/
h er discretion.
(vii) Members in the Nagaland Legislative
Assembly from the Thensa ng district
are not elected directly by the people
but by the regional council.

TPROVISIONS FOR ASSAM
l AND MANIPUR
Assam
Un der Article 371_86 , the President is empowered to provi de for the creation of a co mmittee of the Assam Legislative Assemb ly
consisti n g of the m embers elected from the
Tribal Areas of the state and such other m embers as h e/ she may specify' .
"Thi s Article was added by the 22nd Constitutiona l
Amendm ent Act of 1969.
'The 1Tibal Areas of Assam are specified in the
Sixth Schedule of the Constituti on. They are North
Cachar Hills District, Karbi Anglong District and
Bodola nd 1l!rritorial Areas District.

562

P

Indian POlity

Manipur
Article 371-C m akes t he following s pe cial
provi sions for Man ipur8 ;
1. The Pres ide nt is a u thorized to provide
for th e creation of a commi ttee of the
Manipur Legislative Assembly con sisting
of the members elected from the Hill
Areas of the state9 .
2 . The President C<ln a lso direct that the
Governor shall have specia l responsibility
to secure the proper functioning of that
com mittee.
3. The Gove rnor should sub mit a n annual
report to the Presi den t regard ing th e
administration of the Hill Areas.
4. The Central Government can give
directions to th e State Government as
to the admin istra lion of the Hill Areas.

e PROVISIONS FOR ANDHRA
PRADESH OR TELANGANA

l

Arti cles 371 -0 and 371-E co nta in the sp ecia l
provisio n s for An dhra Pradesh 10. In 2014,
Article 371-0 has a lso been extended to the
state ofThlangana by the Andhra Pradesh Re~
organisation Act of2014. Under Art icle 371-D,
the following are men t ion ed:
1. The Presi d ent is empowered to provide
for equitable opportunities a nd facilities
for the people be longing to different
parts of the state in the matter of public
em ploy ment and education and different provi sions can be made for various
parts of the state.
2 . For the above purpose, the President may
require the State Government to organise
civil posts in local cadres for di ffe rent
parts of the state and provide for direct
recruitment to posts in any local ca dre.

s-rhi s Article was added by the 27th Cons tituliona l
Amendment Act of 1971.
91n this Article, the expression 'H ill Areas' means
such areas as th e President may, by order, declare
to be Hill Areas.
WRoth the Articles were added by the 32nd Constitutional Amendment Act of 1973.

He/ she may specify parts of the state
which shall be regarded as the local area
for ad mi ss ion to any ed ucational in stitution. He/ she may al so specify the exten t
and manner of prefere nce or reservat ion
given in the m atter o f direct recruitm ent
to posts in any such cadre or admission
to any such ed ucationa l in stitution.
3 . The Presid en t may provide for the establishment of an Administrative 1ribunal in
the state to deal with certain di sputes and
grievances relating to appointmen t, allotmen t o r promotion to civ il posts in the
sta te ll . The tribuna l is to function outside
the purview of the state High Court. No
co urt (other than the Supre me Court) is
to exercise any jurisdiction in respect of
any matte r subject to the jurisdiction of
the tribunal. The President may aboli sh
the tribunal whe n he/she is satis fi ed that
its continued exhtence is not necessary.
Article 371-E empowers the Parl iament to
provide for the establi shme nt of a Ce n tral
Uni versity in the state of Andhra Pradesh .

t PROVISIONS FOR SIKKIM
The 36th Co nstitutio nal Amendme nt Act of
1975 made Sikkim a fu ll -n edged state of the
In dian Union . It included a new Article 371-F
co ntaining spec ial provi sion s with respect to
Sikkim. These are as follows:
1. The Sikki m Legislati ve Assembly is to
consist of not less than 30 members.
2. One seat is allotted to Sikki m in the
Lok Sabha and S ikkim forms one
Parliamentary co nstituen cy.
3. For the purpose of protecting the rights
and interests of the different section s of
the Sikkim popu lation, the Parliam e nt
is empowered to provide for the:
(i) number of sea ts in the Sik kim
Legislative Assembly which may
be fi lled by candidates belonging
to such sections; and
liThe tribuna l has bee n set up by the Andhra
Pradesh Administrative 1'ribunal Order, 1975.

Special Provisions for Some States

(ii) del imi tati o n of the Ass em bly

constit uen cies fro m wh ich ca ndi dat
es

belong in g to such sections alo ne ma
y
sta nd for ele ctio n to the Assembly
.
4. Th e Go ver nor sha ll have spe
cia l res po nsib ility for pea ce and for an equ
itab l e
arr ang em ent for ens uri ng the soc
ial and
eco nom ic adv anc em ent of the
dif fere nt
sec tion s of the Si kki m pop ul atio
n. In
the di sch arge of this res pon sib
ili ty, th e
Gove rno r sha ll act in hi s/h er di
scr etio n ,
sub j ect to the dir ect ion s issu ed
by the
Pre sid ent .
5. The Pre sid ent can ext end (wi
th res tri ction s or mo dif ica tion s) to Sik
kim any
law wh ich is in forc e in a sta
te of the
Ind ian Un ion .

t PROVISIONS FOR MIZORAM

\

Art icle 37J-G s pec ifie s the foll
ow ing s pec ial
pro vis ion s for Miz ora m 12:
1. The Acts of Pa rlia me nt rela
ting to th e
foll ow ing ma tter s would not app
ly to
Mi zor am unl ess the Sta te Leg
isla tive
Ass em bly so deci des:
(i) reli gio us or soc ial pra ctic es
of the
Mizos;
(ii) Mizo cus tom ary law a nd pro
ced ure ;
(iii ) adm inis trat ion of civil and
crim ina l
jus tice inv olv ing decisio ns acc ord
·
iug to Mizo cus tom ary law; and
(iv ) ow nershi p and tran sfe r of
lan d.
2. Th e Mi zor am Legisla t ive Ass
em bly is to
co nsist of not less tha n 40 me mb
e rs.

j

PROVISIONS FO R AR UN AC HA
L
PR AD ES H AN D GO A

Ar una cha l Pra des h
Un der Art icle 371-H , the foll ow
ing spe cia l
pro vis ion s are ma de for Aru nac hal
Pra des h l 3:
1. The Go ver nor of Aru nac ha l Pra
desh sha ll
hav e spe cia l res pon sib ilit y for
law a nd
lJoy-h is Article was added by the 53rd
Constitutio nal
Amendment Act of 1986.
l~ is Article was Rdded by the
55th Constitutional
Amendment Act of 1986.

~ 56 3

ord er in the sta te. In the dis cha
rge of
this res pon sib ilit y, the Govern or,
afte r
co n sul tin g the Cou n ci l of Mi
nis ters ,
exe rc ises his / h e r ind ivid ual j udg
e me nt
and h is/ her dec isio n is fina l. Th
is specia l res pon sib ility of the Go ver nor
sha ll
cea se wh en the Pre sid ent so dir
ects.
2. Th e Aru na c h a l Pra des h Leg
is lat i ve
Ass em bly is to con sist of not less
tha n
30 me mb ers .

Go a
Art icle 371-1 pro vid es tha t the
Goa Legislative Ass em bly is to con si st of
not
less th an
30 me mb ers l4 .

t PROVISIONS FOR KARNATAKA

Un der Art icle 371-.1, the Pre sid ent
is em powere d to pro vid e tha t the Go ver nor
of Ka ma tak a would have sp eci a l res pon sib
ilit y for
1. The esta blis hm ent of a sep
ara te developme nt b oa rd for Hyde rab ad- Ka
rna tak a
reg i on 15
2. Ma kin g a pro vis ion tha t a rep
ort on the
wo rki ng of the boa rd wou ld be
pla ced
eve ry yea r befo re the Sta te Leg
isla tive
Assem bl y
3. Th e equ itab le allo cat ion of
fun ds fo r
develo pment al expend itur e over the
region
4. Th e res erv a tion of sea ts in
edu cat ion al
and voc at ion al tra ini ng ins titu
tion s in
th e reg ion for stu den ts wh o bel
ong to
the reg ion
5 . The res erv atio n in stat e gov ern
me nt posts
in th e reg ion for pe rso ns wh o bel
ong to
the reg io n
Art icle 371-J ( wh i ch pro vid ed
for spe cia l
pro v is ion s for the Hy de rab adKa rna tak a
reg ion of the sta te of Kar nat aka )
was ins erte d
in the Co n stit uti on by the 98
th Co nst itu tion al Am e'ld me nt Act of 2012.
Th e spe cia l
I~hi s Article was added by

the 56th Constitutional
Amendment Act of 1987.
l~e Hyderabad _ Karnata
ka region includes the
six backwa rd districts of Northern Kar
nataka, viz.,
Gulba rga, Bidar, Raichur, Koppal , Yadgir
and SeHary.

564

ff

Indian Polity

p rov is io ns a im to esta blish a n institut ion al
m ec h a ni s m fo r equi tab le a llo cati o n o f
fund s to meet th e deve lopm e n t needs ove r
th e reg ion , as well as to enh an ce hum a n
reso urces a nd prom ote em pl oy m ent fro m
the regio n by provid in g for loca l cadres in
se rvice a nd reservatio n in edu cat ion al an d
vocat ion al tra inin g instituti o n s.
In 20JO, the Legislative Assembly as well as
th e Leg islat ive Coun ci l of Karna ta ka passed
Table 77.1

Articles Related to Special Provisions for some States at a Glance

---

Article N o

separate reso lution s seek ing special prov is io ns fo r th e Hyderaba d-K,a rnata ka regi on of
th e state of Ka rnata ka. The gove rnm en t o f
Ka rn ataka also endorsed th e need fo r specia l
p rov is io n s for the reg io n. Th e resol utio n s
so ught to accele rate develo pm ent of the most
backwa rd reg ion of the state a nd promote
in cl usive growth with ,a view to reducin g
in ter-di str ict a nd in ter-regio nal d ispari ties in
the state.

Subject m<1tter

371 .

Special provision with respect to the states of Maharashtra and GuJarat

371A.

SpecIal pt<NtsIon _

3718.

371C.

respect to 1he .... of Nagai"""

Special provision with respect to the state of Assam

-~

_ _...;Spec
= ;;lal provlslon with respect to 1he state of Manlpur

371D.

Special provisions with respect to the state of Andhra Pradesh or the state of Telangana

371E.

establISh...., of Central University In Andhro Prodesh;;...._ _

371 F.

Special provisions with respect to the state of Sikkim

371G. _ _....;~~ provision wtth respect to 1he S18te of Mlzora
=m
;,;....~ _ _•
371H.

Special provision with respect to the state of Arunachal Pradesh

371~.

Special provision Wi1h respect to the st... of Goo _ __

37 1J.

Special provisions with respect to the state of Karnataka

In this Part...
78. Political Parties
79. Role of Regional Parties
80. Elections
81. Election Lows
82. Electoral Reforms
83. Voting Behaviour

CHAPTE~
..

78

t MEANING AND TYPES
Political parties are voluntary associations
or organised groups of individuals who share
the same political views and who try to gain
political power through constitutional means
and who desire to work for promoting the national interest. There are four types of political parties in the modern democratic states,
viz., (i) reactionary parties which cling to the
old socia-economic and political institutions;
(ii)" conservative parties which believe in the
status-quo; (iii) liberal parties which aim at
reforming the existin g institutions; and (iv)
radical parties which aim at establishing a
new order by overthrowing the existing inst'itutions. In their classification of political
parties on the basis of ideologies, the political
scientists have placed the radical parties on
the left and the liberal parties in the centre
and reactionary and conservative parties on
the right. In other words, they are described
as the leftist parties, cen trist parties and the
rightist parties. In Jndia, the CPI and CPM are
- !: l. C examples of leftist parties, the Congress
of centrist parties and the BJP is an example
of rightist parties.

84. Coalition Government
85. Anti·Defection Law
86. Pressure Groups
87. Nationallntegrotion
88. Foreign Policy

Political Parties

There are three kinds of party. systems
in the world, viz., (i) one party system in
which only one ruling party exists and no
opposit ion is permitted, as for exa mpl e, in
the former communist countries like the
USSR and oth er East European countries;
(ii) two-party system in which two major
parties exists, as for example, in USA and
Britain'; and (iii) multi-party system in
whi ch there are a number of political parties, as for example, in France, Switze rland
and Italy.

t PARTY SYSTEM IN INDIA
The Indian party system has the following
characteristic features:

Multi-Party System
The continental size of the country, the diversified character of Indian society, the adoption
ITh e two parties in the US are Democratic and
Republican, and in Britain are Conservative and
Labour.

566

Indion Poli

of uni versal ad ult fra nchi se, the pecuHar
type of poli tical process, a nd other factors
have given rise to a large numbe r of political
parties. In fact, India has the largest number
of po li tica l parti es in the world. Further,
Ind ia has a ll categories of parti es-le ft par·
t ies, ce ntrist parti es, right parties, communa l
parties, no n-co mmunal parties and so on.
Consequentl y, the hung Parliaments, hung
assembli es a nd coa li tio n governments have
become a co mmon phenomena.

One-Dominant Party System
In spit e of the multi-party syste m, the
poli tica l sce ne in In dia was dominated for
a long pe riod by th e Co ngress. He n ce, Rajni
Kothari, an emin ent politica l ana lyst , preferred to ca n the Indi a n party system as 'o ne
party dominance syste m' or th e 'Congress
system, 2. The dom in a nt pos it ion enjoyed by
the Co n gress ha s been declining sin ce 1967
with th e rise of reg ion al parties and oth c'r
national pa rti es like Janata ( 1977), Janata
Da l (1989) a nd the BJP ( 1991 ) leading to the
development of a co mpetiti ve multi-party
syste m .

Lack of Clear Ideology
Except th e HJP and the two comm uni st
parties (C Pl a nd CPM ), a ll other parties do
not have a clea r-cut ideology. They (Le., a ll
other parties) arc id eo logi call y closer to
eac h oth er. T hey have a close rese mblan ce
in their policies a nd programmes. Almost
eve ry party advocates democracy, secul arism , socia lis m a nd Ga ndhi sm . More than
this, eve ry party, in cl uding the so-ca ll ed
ideological p art ies, is gu ided by onl y one
co n sid eratio n-power ca p tu re. Thus, politi cs has become issu e-based rather than the
id eo logy and pragma ti sm has re pla ced the
co mmitm en t to the prin cip les.
2 Rnjni

Kothari: Co ngress System in India, Asian
Survey, Volum e 4, No. 12 (December, 1964), pp. 1-18.

Personality Cult
Quite often, the parties a re organi sed arou nd
an em inent leader who becomes more im porta nt than the party a nd its ideology. Parties
are known by their leaders rather tha n by
their manifesto. He nce, it is sa id that ~t h e re
are political personalities rather than polit ica l parties in India ~.

Based on Traditional Factors
In the western countries, the political parties
are form ed o n the basis of socio-eco nomic
and political programme. On the other hand ,
a large number of parties in Ind ia are formed
on the basis of rel igio n, caste, language, cui·
ture, race a nd so o n. These parti es ge nerally
work for the pro mot ion of com munal and
sectiona l interests and thereby undermin e
the gen eral public interest.
.

Emergence of Regional Parties
An oth er sig nifi ca n t feature of the Indian
pa rty syste m is the e me rge n ce of a large
number of reg io nal parties a nd their growin g
ro le. They have become the ruling parties i n
var ious states. In the beg inning, they were
co n fi n ed to the regiona l politics on ly. But,
of la te, they have co me to playa signifi ca nt
ro le in the nat io na l politics due to coa liti on
govern me nts at the Cen tre.

Factions and Defections
Facti ona lism, defections, spli ts, mergers, fra gme ntation, polarisation and so on have been
a n important aspect o f the functioning o f
political parties in India. Lust for power and
ma teri al co nsideratio ns have made the politicians to leave their party and join another
party or start a new party. The practice of
defectio ns gained greater .curren cy after the
fourth general elections ( 1967). This phenomenon ca used political in stability both at the
Ce ntre and in the sta tes and led to di sin tegTa.
tion of th e parties.

Politicol Poroes

Lack of Effective Opposition
An effect ive Oppo sition is very essent ial for
the successful opera tion of the parlia menta ry
demo cracy preva lent in India. It check s the
autoc ratic tende ncies of the Tuling party and
provides an altern ative gover nment . However,
since the first gener al electi ons, an effect ive,
strong , organ ised and viable nation al Opposition cou ld never emerg e excep t in flashes.
The Oppo sition parti es h ave no unity and
very often adopt mutua lly confli cting positions with respec t to the ruling party. They
h ave fa iled to playa constr uctive role in the
fun ctioni ng of the body politic and in the
proce ss of nation buildi ng.
The forma tion of va ri ous politi ca l parties (in the chron ologic al order ) is given in
Thble 78.1.

'tt 567

Cond itions for Recog nition as

a Natio nal Party

At presen t, a party is recogn i sed as a nation al
party if any of the follow ing co nditio ns is
fulfill ed',
1. If it secure s six per cent of valid votes
polled in any four or more states at a
gener al electi on to the Lok Sabha or to
the legisla tive assem bly; and, in addition, it wins four seats in the Lok Sabha
from any state or states ; or
2. If it wins two per cent of seats in the Lok
Sabha at a general election; and these candidates are elected from three states; or
3. If it is recog nised as a state party in four
states.

Cond it ions for Recog nit ion as

a State Party

REC OGN ITIO N OF NAT IONA L
AND STATE PARTIES
The Electi on Comm i ssion regist ers politi cal
partie s for the purpo se of electi ons and grants
them recog nition as nation al or state partie s
on the basis of their poll perfo rmance. The
other partie s are simply declar ed as registeredunrecognised partie s.
The recognition grante d by the Co mmis sion to the partie s determ ines their right to
certai n privil eges like alloca tion of the party
symbo ls, provision of time for politic al broadcasts on the state-o wned televi sion and radio
statio ns and access to electo ral rolls.
Every national party is allotte d a symbol
exclusively reserved for its use throug hout the
countr y. -Simil arly, every state party is allotte d
a symbo l exclusively reserv ed for its use in the
state or states in which it is so recogn ised. A
registe red-un recog nised party, on the other
hand, can select a symbo l from a list of free
symbo ls. In other words, th e Comm ission
specifies certai n symbols as 'reserved symbo ls'
which are meant for the candidates set up by the
recognised partie s and others as 'free symbols'
which are mean t for other candidates.

At presen t, a party is recogn ised as a state
party in a state if any of the following conditions is fulfill ed 4 :
I . If it secure s six per cent of the valid votes
polled in the state at a general electi on
to the legisla tive asse mbly of the state
conce rned; a nd, in additi on, it wins
2 seats in the assem bly of the state concerne d; or
2. If it secure s six per cen t of the valid votes
polled in the state at a genera l electio n to
the Lok Sabha from the state conce rned;
and, in additi on, it wins I seat in the Lok
Sabha fro m the state conce rned; or
3. If it wins three per cent of seats in the
legislative assem bly at a genera l electio n
to the legisla tive assem bly of the state
con cerne d or 3 seats in the assem bly,
which ever is more; or
4. If it wins I seat in the Lok Sabha for every
25 seats or any fra ction thereo f allotte d
to the state at a gener al electi on to the
Lok Sabha from the state conce rned; or
lnte Election Symbols (Reservatio n and Allotm ent)
Order, 1968, as amend ed from time to tim e.
4Ibid.

568

,r(!

Indian Polity

5. If it secu res eight pe r cent of the total
va li d votes polled in the state at a Genera l
Election to the Lok Sabha from the state
or to the legislative assembly of the sta te.
Th e num ber of recogn ised parties keeps on
chang in g on the basis of th eir pe rforma n ce
in the ge neral elect ions. The nation al part ies
a nd sta te pa rt ies are also kn own as all-I nd ia
parties and reg iona l parties respective ly.
At the ti me of First Lok Sabha genera l elections (1952). th ere were 14 nat iona l pa rtiesS

and 39 state parties in the co un try. On the
eve of Seventee n th Lo k Sabha ge nera l electio ns (201 9), there were 7 n at iona l parti es6
and 52 state parties in the cou n try.
(HMS), Ind ian Na tional Congress ( INC), Kr ish ikar
Lok Party (KLP) , Kisan Mazdoor Praja Party
(KMPP). Revo lutio na ry Communist Party orl nd ia
( RCPI). Ra m Rajya Pa ri shad ( RRP). Revo lution ary
Socialist Party (RSP), Sch edull!d Caste Fede ration
(SC F) and Socialist Party (SP).
6Bahujan Sa maj Party ( BSP), Bha ratiya Ja na t.a Party
( BJP) , Com m u n ist Pa rty oflndia (CPI), Communist
Party of Ind ia (Marx ist) (CPM) , Ind ian Nationa l
Congress (INC). Natio n alist Con gress Pa rty (NCP)
and All India lb n amool Congress (AITC).

5 Bh aratiya

Ja n Sangh (BJS). Bo lshevik Party of
Ind ia (BP I). Communist Party of In d ia (C PI).
Forward Bl oc (Ma rx ist Group) (FBL-MG), Forward
Bloc (Ruikar Group) ( FBL-RG). Hindu Ma hasab ha

Table 78.1 Formation of Pol itical Parties (Chronological Order)
51. No.

Name of the Party (AbbrevIatIon)

.......:.';.
. _ ::.
'n:::,:
dian National Congress (INC)

2.

Shlroman! Akali Dal (SAD)

3.

Communist Party of India (CPI)

Founder

Year of Format on

A.O. Hume

1885
1920

_ - -_ _ ,_"M
::;.;,;
N:..
. :;
Ro
;oYc",~ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _'92
;5
: --._ - ;

.....;:
4_ o</l.!2!il!!u & Kashmir National Conference JKNC

Sheikh Abdu"ah

1939

C N. Annadural

1949

5.

Dravlda Munnetra Kazhagam (DM;K;:,I::::-::- _ _ _ _

6.

Communist Pat:lY of India (Marxist) (CPM)

7.

Shiv Sena (SHS)

8.

All India Anna Oravtda Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK) M.G. Ram8ch8!'nd
~
r.~nl...__

9.
10.

Bharatiya Janata Party (B~
JP
.:'____
_ _ _ _..:;A.B. Vajpayee and L.K. Advani
1980·
Telugu Desam Party (TOp)
_____
N.T. Rama Rao
----,::;98
~2":..__..

-='-___

___

'964

~~...:B;;
al Thackeray

1966-

1972

_~'~'~
. ..;Bah~anSam~Party(BSP)
__--_ _ _ _ _~K::
anshiR;a~
m ---------~
'9~8~4,.-~
L..!.'2"._ ..:A:,>som Gana Parlshad IAG,'2.._ _ _ _ _ _
P.K. Mahan
1985
13.
5amajwadi Party (S;:.P,I ~__
Mulayam Singh Yadav
1992

, -.:.:
'4",._ .'!
Ra".1sO'hlriya
1'
Jana" uDa!'jIj'(R'lJI;:'
D), -_ _
15.

_ _ _...WI
~
I Pras~

8iju Janata Dal (BJD)

•

1997

Naveen Patnaik

1997

r:t'6~.::jA~IIQln~d~'a~l~ri;n=.~~
mo ~c~on;~~.~sSU(~ArrnfqL:::::::::::~~~]Bo;ne
~a~"~. .______~1~9~9~
8 ,-~
. .';':";'"_ ;::
Ja:;m
::m
,::::,:
u and Kashmir People's Democratic pa::r~I:..
ty PD
~
PI~M
::::
Uft
::i~M~O~h::d~. .::s;:
aY::'::';:d:..._ _ _ _ _...;'~9~
9~9...,_"'1
....'1.':8...
. ->J'1an
1mat
ma Dal (United) (J (U,...
, ______
Sharod Y8(lav
1999

19.

Janata Oal (Secular) (JO(S))

H.D. Deve Gowda

1999

20.

Nationalist Congress Party (NCp)

Shared Pawsr. PA Sangma
and Tariq Anwar

1999

21 .
22.

Lok Janshaktl Pa:,rty
~I;
LJ;:P,,)-:-::::-:: -_ _ _ _ _ _ _.::R:;
a=
m,.v;;i;;;
'a;.
s.;.p;;
as;.:w
;;a;;n:..,,_ _ _ _ _ _.;2~O:;O::O:....-.....
K. Chandra Shekar Rao
2001

TeIangana Rashtra Samlthl (fRS)
(Now. Bharat Rashtra Samlthl) lE!RS)

23.

Yuvajana Sramika Rythu Congress Party (YSRCP)

Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy

2011

24.

Aam Aadmi PartY (AAPJ

Arvlnd Kejrtwal

20

25.

National People's Party (NPP)

P.A. Sangma

2013

,

,

CHAPl1ER

79

T

he presence of a large number of
regional parties is an important feature
of the Indian Political System. They
have come to playa vital role in Indian politics at all levels, i.e. local, state and national.
This is more so in the context of the new era
of coalition politics.
.

t FEATURES

J

Following are the features of a regional party:
1. It generally operates within a -particular
state or specific region .. Its electoral base
; is limited to a. single region . .
2. It 'articulates regional interestS and identifies itself with a particular cultural,
religious, linguistic or ethnic group.
3. ,It is primarily concerned with exploiting
the local resources of discontent or pre- .
serving a variety of primordial demands
based on language, caste or community
or region l .
4. It focuses on local or regional issues and
aims to capture politiCal power at the state
level.
5. ·It has a political desire for greater
regional autonomy of states in the
Indian Union 2 •
IObservation made by Stanley A. Kochnock in Ram
Reddy, G. and Sharma, RA.V., Regionalism in India _
A Study ofThlangana, Concept Publishers, New Delhi,
1979, pp. 87-88.
2Brass, P.R, The Politics of India Since Independence,
Second Edition, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK, ]993, p. 89.

Role of Regional
Parties

t CLASSIFICATION
The various regional parties in India can be
classified into the following four categor:es:
I . Those regional parties which are based on
the regional culture or ethnicity. These
'include Shiromani Akali Dal, National
Conference, DMK, Thlugu Des"a m, Shiv
Sena~ Asom Gana Parishad and so on.
2. Those regional parties which have an allIndia outlook but lack a national electoral
base. The examples are Samajwadi Party,
Nationalist Congress Party and so on.
3. Those regional parties which have been
form'ed by a split in national partIes.
For example, Biju Janata Dal, Rashtriya
Janata Dal, ..:fi inamool Congress, YSR
Congress and so ' on.
4. Those regional p3i~ies which have been
formed by individU'avl leaders on the
basis of their charismatic personality.
These are called as personalised parties
and they are short-live:d.

t RISE
There are multiple reasons flO
! the emergence of
r~gional parties in India. These are as follows:
1. Cultural and et~mic pi'llralism of the
Indian ·society.
.
2. Economic disparities and regional imbalances in the development.
3. Desire of certain sec(ions or areas .to
. maintain separate identity due to his~orical factors.
.
4. Self-interest of the deposed Maharajas
and dispossessed Zarnindars.
..' ..

•
570

Indion Polity

S. Failure of national parties to meet th e
regional aspi rations.
6. Reorganisation of states on the ba sis of
language.
7. Charismati c perso nality of the regional
leaders.
8 . Factional fights \vithin the larger parties.
9. Centralisi ng tendencies of the co ngress
party.
10. Absence of a strong opposition party at
the central level.
II. Role of caste and religion in the polit ica l
process.
J Z. Alienation a nd discontentment among
the triba l groups.

~ ROLE
The following points highlight the role played
by the regional parties in Indian politics:
J . They have provided better governance and
a stable government at the regional level.
2. They have posed a c hall e nge to the oneparty dominant system in the country
and led to a decl ine in the domination
of the Congress party3.
3. They have made a strong impact on the
nature and course of centre-state relations. The tension areas in ce ntre-state
relations and the demand for the grant of
greater autonomy made the centra l leadership more responsive to the needs of the
regional actors 4 .
4. They have made politics more competitive and popu lar participation in the
political process more extensive at the
grass roots5 .
5 . They have widened the choice for voters
in both the parliamentary and assembly
e lections. The voters can vote for that
party which aims to promote the interest of their state/ region.
bwa ll , K.R., Regiona l parties in Indian politics:
A preview. In Bhatnagar, S. and Kumar, P. (Eds)
Regional Political Par-ties in Ind ia, ESS Publications,
Delhi, 1988, pp. 1- 16.
4I bili.
5 (bili.
3 Bom

I
6. They have in c reased t he po1itical consciousness of the people and also their
in terest in politi cs. They bring imo
focus the loca l or regional issues which
immediately attract the attention of the
masses.
7. They provided a check agai nst the dictatoria l te ndencies of the central government. They opposed the ruling cong·ress
party at the centre on certai n issues a nd
forced the dominant party to be more
reasonable in its approach to the process
of conflict resolution 6 .
8. T hey have made a significant contribution for the successful functioning of
parliamentary democracy. In a parl iamentary democracy, the minority must
have its say, the majority must have
its way, a nd the regional parties have
played this role successfully by being
ruling parties in some states and opposition parties at the centre 7 .
9 . They ha ve succeeded in ex posing the
partisan role of the Governors in the
appointment and dismissal of the Chief
Minister, in issuing of ordinances and
reservatio n of bills for the consideration
of the President8 .
10. After the dawn of the era of coa lition politics, th e regional parties have assumed
an importa nt role in national politics.
They have joined the coa lition governments formed at the ce ntre an d shared
power with the national parties.

~ DYSFUNCTIONS
However, there are also negative points in the
ro le of regional parties. These are as fo llows:
1. They have given more importan ce to
regional interests rather than nationa l
interes ts. They ha ve neglected the
impli cations and co nseq uences of their
iwach, J.R. , Dynamics of Indian Government
and Politics, Second Edition, Sterling Publishers

6S

Pri va te Limited, New De lh i, 1990, p. 865.

7 l bid.

81bid.

Role of Regional Parties

narrow approach to the resolution of
national issues.
2. They have encouraged regionalism, cas·
teism, linguism, communalism and
tribalism which have become hurdles to
national integration.
3. They are responsible for the unresolution
of the inter-state water disputes, inter·
state border disputes and other interstate issues.
4. They have also indulged in corruption,
nepotism, favouritism and other forms

,
i

,
)
,

~, 571

of misutilisation of power in order to
promote their self·interest.
5. They have focused more on the populist
schemes and measures to expand and
strengthen their electoral base. This has
adversely affected the state economy and
development.
6. They bring in regional factors in the
decision-making and the policy-making
by the coalition government at the centre.
They force the central1eadership to yield
to their demands.

80
t ELECTORAL SYSTEM
Articles 324 to 329 in Part XV of the Con stitution m ake t he fo llowing provision s with
regard to the e lectoral syste m in our country:
1. Th e Co n st itution (Art icle 324) provides for a n ind e pendent Electio n
Co mmi ss ion in order to ens ure free
a nd fair electio ns in the co untry. T he
powe r of superin te nden ce, directio n and
co ndu ct of elections to the Parliament,
the sta te legislatures, th e office of the
Pres ident and the office o f th e VicePres ide nt is vested in the Co mmi ss ion 1•
2. Th ere is to be only one genera l electora l
roll for eve ry territorial co nstituen cy
for e lectio n to th e Pa rliam e n t and th e
state leg islatures. Thu s, the Co nstitution
has aboli shed th e system of com muna l
representation and se parate electorates
which led to the partitio n of the coun t ry.
3 . No perso n is to be in eligibl e for inclus ion in the electora l ro ll o n gro unds
on ly of relig ion , race, caste, sex o r a ny
of them. Fu rther, no person ca n cla im
to be included in any specia l electo ral
roll for any constitu e ncy o n g rounds
on ly of reHgion , race, caste or sex o r
a ny of the m. Thu s, th e Co nsti tution has
accorded eq uality to every citizen in th e
matter of electo ral fran chi se.
4. The electio ns to the Lok Sabha a nd the
state assem blies are to be 011 the ba sis of
adult fra nchi se. Thus, every perso n who
is a separate state election com mi ssion to
deal with electi ons to the panchayatsand municipa-

l T here

liti es in the state.

Elections

is a c iti ze n of Jndia a nd who is ] 8 2 years
of age, is entitled to vote at t he e lect ion
provided he/ she is no t di squa lified u nder
th e provision s of til e Co nsti tution or any
law m<lde by the a ppropriate leg islature
(Pa rliam e n t o r sta te legislature) on the
grou nd of no n-res idence, u nso u nd mind,
cr im e or co rrupt or ill egal practice.
5. Pa rli a me n t may m ake provis io n wi th
respect [0 a ll matters relating to elections to th e Parliam ent a nd the sta te
leg islatures in cl ud ing the preparatio n of
electora l roll s, the delimitatio n o f constitu encies and a ll other matters necessary fo r sec uring the ir due con st itu tion.
6. The state legislatures ca n a lso ma ke provisio n wi th respect to a ll ma tte rs relatin g to e lect ions to t he state legi slatures
includin g the prepa ratio n o f electoral
ro ll s a nd all other matters n ecessary
fo r securing their due co nstitu tion . But ~
they can m a ke provision for on ly those
m atte rs wh ich are not covered by the
Pa rlia m e n t. In other words, th ey ca n
o nl y s upplem e n t the parli amentary law
and can not override it.
7. The Constitution declares that the va lidity
o f a ny law relating to th e delimitation
of constitu e nc ies or the a ll ot ment of
seats to such constitu encies ca nnot be
qu estioned in a n y court. Co n seq ue n tly,
the orde rs iss ued by th e Delimi tati on
Co mmiss io n become fina l and ca n not
be challenged in any cou rt.
z-rhe 61St Amendment Act of 1988 has reduced the
voti ng age from 21 to 18 yea rs. This ca me into force
on March 28, 1989.

I

l

-J

Eieaioos

8. The Co nst itution lays down that no
election to the Parlia ment or the state
legislature is to be questioned except by
an election petition presented to such
authority and in such manner as provided
by the appropriate legislature. Since 1966,

the election petitions are triable by high

courts a lone. But, the a ppellate jurisdioticn lies with the Supreme Court alone.
Article 3238 empowers the approp riate

legislature (Parliament or state legislature)

to establish a tribunal for the adjudication of

election disputes. It also provides for the exclu-

sion of the jurisdiction of all courts (except
the sp ecial leave appeal jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court) in such disputes. So far, no
such tribunal has been established. It must be
noted here that in C1wndra Kumar casel (1997),
the Supreme Court declared thi s provision as
unconstitutionaL Con sequently, if at any time
a n election tribunal ·is establish ed, an appea l
from its decision lies to the high court.

~ ELECTION MACHINERy3,

,,

Election Commission of India (ECI) Under
Article 324 of t he Co n stituti o n of Indi a,
the Election Commissio n of India is vested
with the power of superinte ndence, direction and contro l of conducti ng t h e elections to the Lok Sabha and State Legislati ve
Asse mbli es. The Election Com mi ssion of
India is a three-m ember body, with one Chi ef
Elect ion Commissioner a nd two Elect ion
Commissio ners. The President of India
appoints the Chi ef Election Co mmi ssioner
and th e Election Comm iss ion ers.
Chief Electoral Officer (CEO) Th e Chief
Electoral Officer of a Sta te/Union Thrritory is
authorised to supervise the election work in
the State/Union Thrritory subject to the overall
superi ntendence, direction and control of the
Election Commi ssion of India. The Election
Commission of Indi a nominates or designates

\

an officer of the Government of the State!
Uni on Thrritory as the Chief Electoral Officer
in consultation with that State Government/
Union Thrritory Administration.
District Election Officer (DEO) The District
Election Officer superv ises the election work
in a district. The Election Com mission of India
nominates or designates an officer of the State
Government as the District Election Officer in
consultation with the State Government.
Returning OfFicer (RO) The Returning Officer
of a Parliamentary or asseml?ly constituency
is responsible for the conduct of elections
in the Parliamentary or assembly constituency concerned. The Election Commission
of India n ominates or designates an officer
of the Govern ment or a local a uthority as the
Returning Officer for each of the assembly and
parliamentary constituencies in consultation
with the State Govern ment/U nion 'Territory
Administration.
Electoral Registrat ion Officer (ERO) The
Electora l Registration Officer is responsible
for the preparation of electora l rolls for a
Parli amentary / assembl y con st itu e ncy. Th e
Election Commission ofIndia, in consultation
with the Sta te!UT government, appoints a n
officer of the government or the local authorities as the Electoral Registration Officer.
Presiding Officer The Presiding Officer with
the assistance of po11ing officers conducts the
poll at a polling station. Th e District Ejection
Officer a ppoints the Presiding Officers and
the Polling Officers. In the case of Un ion
Terri tories l such appointments are made by
th e Returning Officers.
Observers The Electio n Commission of
India nominates officers of Government as
Ob servers for Pa rliamentary and Assembly
Con stituen cies. These observers are of various kinds 4 :
1. General Observers: Th e Com mi ss ion
deploys General Observers in adequate

3L. Chandra Kumarvs. Union of India (1997). Clause3(d)

of Article 3238 was declared as unconstitutional.
information is obtained from the official
website of the Election Comm ission of India.

~is

'tj, 573

4

Ha ndbook fOT Media - General Elections to the
17th Lok Sabha (2019) , Election Com mission of
India , pp. 95- 96.

574

P

Indian Polity

number to ensure smooth conduct of elections. T hese Observers a re asked to keep a
close watc h on every stage of the electoral
process to e nsure free a nd fair election s.
2. Expenditure Observers: The Commission
appoints Expen diture Observe rs and
Assistant Expe ndi t ure Obse rve rs who
will exclu sive ly monitor th e e lection
expe ndi tu re of the con testing candidates.
3 . Police Observers: The Co mmi ss ion
deploys IPS officers a s Poli ce Observe rs
at State a nd Distri ct leve ls, de pendin g
upon th e se nsitivity of th e Co nst ituency,
wherever required. Th ey will monitor all
activities relating to force deploy me nt,
law and order situation a nd co-ordinate
between the Civil and Poli ce adm inistration to ensure free a nd fair elect ion .
4 . Micro Observers: In addition to Ge neral
Observers, the Co mm iss ion a lso depl oys
Micro Obse rvers to obse rve the poll
proceedings on th e poll day in cr itica l!
vul nera bl e polling station s. Th ey are
c h ose n from Ce n tra l Government !
Ce n t ral PSUs officials. They obse rve
the proceedings at th e Polli ng Sta tion s
on the poll day right from the mock
poll to the comp letion of poll and the
process of sea ling of EVMs and VV PATs
and other documents to e nsure th a t
a ll in struct ions of t he Co mmi ss ion are
complied with by the Polli ng Parties a nd
the Polling Agents. They also report to
the General Observers directly about any
vitiation of the poll proceedings in the ir
a ll otted Polling Station s.

l ELECTION PROCESSs

and if the re is no a lternati ve gove rnment
ava ilable to take ove r.
Schedule of Elections Whcn the fivc- ycar
limit is up, or the leg isla ture has bee n di ssol ved a nd ncw e lect ions have been called,
the Election Co mmj ssion puts in to effe c t
th e ma chin e ry fo r holdin g an e lec ti on. The
Co nstitution states that th ere can be no longer than six mont hs between the last sess ion
of the d isso lved Lok Sa bha a nd t he reca lli ng
of the new Hou se, so el ec ti ons have to be
co ncl uded before the n.
The Election Comm iss io n norm a ll y a nn oun ces th e sched ule of e lectio ns in il maj or
press confe re n ce a few weeks befo re t he
form a l pro cess is se t in mot ion. Th e Model
Code of Cond uct for guidance of ca ndida tes
and political pa rties co mes immediate ly into
effect after such anno un ce me nt.
The formal process for the elect ions starts
with the No tifica tion or Notifi ca tion s ca ll ing upon the electorate to elec t Members of
a HOLise. As soon as Not ificat ions are issued,
ca ndidates can start filing their nomination s
in th e constitue n cies from where they wish
to co ntest. Th e candidates are given a week
to put forward their no mination s. These are
sc rutini sed by t he Ret urning Officers and if
not fou nd to be in order ca n be rejected a fter
a summ ary hea rin g. Val idl y nominated candidates ca n withdraw within two days after
nomination s have been scrutini sed.
Oath or Affirmation it is necessary for a
ca ndidate to make and subscribe a n oath or
affirmation before an officer authorised by. the
EJection Commission. For any particular election , the a uthorised persons are, principally, the
Returning Officer a nd the Assist.:'1I1t Returning
Officer for the constituen cy. The candidate, in
person, is required to make the oath or affirmation immediately afte r presenting hislher nomination papers a nd in any case not later than
the day previous to the date of the scrutinl .

Time of Elections Electi ons fo r the Lok
Sabha and eve ry state Legislati ve Assemb ly
have to take pla ce every fi ve years, unless
called ea rli er. The President can di ssolve Lok
Sabha and cal1 a General Elect ion before five
years is up , if th e Government can no longer
co mma nd th e confidence of the Lok Sa bha,

Election Campaign and Model Code The
campaign is the period when the politi ca l

s-rhis information is downloaded fro m the official
website of the Election Co mmission of India.

6General Elections 2009: Reference Handbook, Press
Information Bureau, Government of India, p. 189.

flections

partie s put forwa rd their candi dates and
argum ents with which they hope to persua de
peopl e to vote for their candi dates and parties. The officia l camp aign lasts at least two
weeks from the drawi ng up of the list of
nomin ated candi dates, and offici ally ends
48 hours before pollin g closes .
Durin g the electi on campa ign, the politica l partie s and conte sting ca ndida tes are
expec ted to abide by a Model Code of Condu ct' evolved by the Electi on Comm ission
on the basis of a conse nsus amon g politi cal
parties. The mode l code lays down broad
guide lines as to how the politic al parties and
candid ates should condu ct thems elves during .
the electi on campa ign. It is intend ed to maintain the electi on campa ign on h ealthy lines,
avoid clashe s and confli cts betwe en politi cal
partie s or their suppo rters and to ensure
peace and order durin g th e camp aign period
and therea fter, until the result s are declar ed.
The model code also prescr ibes guide lines for
the ruling party either at the Centr e or in the
state to ensur e that a level field is maint ained
a nd that no cause is given for any comp lai nt
that the ruling party has used its officia l position for the purpo ses of its electio n campa ign,
Once an electio n has been caHed, parties
issue manifestos detaiH ng the progr amme s
"they wish to imple ment if electe d to government, the streng ths of their leaders, and the
failures of oppos ing parties and their leaders.
Rallies and meeti ngs where the candid ates try
to persuade, cajole and enthu se suppo rters, and
denigr ate oppon ents, are held throug hout the
consti tuenci es.
Polling: Days Pollin g is norma lly held on a
numb er of differ ent days in different constitue ncies, to enabl e the securi ty forces and
those monit oring the electi on to keep law
and order and ensur e that voting durin g the
electi on is fair.
"'The Model Code of Conduct was agreed to by aU the
political parties in 1968. The Election Commission
first effectively put to use the Model Code of
Conduct in the year 1991 to ensure fair electio ns
and a leVel playing field.

'tl 575

Ballo t Paper s and Symb ols After nomination of candi dates is co~plete, a list of
comp eting ca ndida tes is p rep ared by the
Retur ning Office r, and ballot papers are
printe d . Ballot paper s are printe d with the
name s of the candi dates (in langu ages set by
the Electi on Co mmis sion) and the symbo ls
allotte d to each of the candid ates. Candi dates
of recog n ised partie s are allotte d thei r party
symbo ls.
Since 1998, the Comm i ssion has in creasingl y u sed Elect ronic Votin g Mach ines
(EMVs) instea d of ballot boxes. In 2003, all
state electi ons and by electi ons were held
using EVMs . Encou raged by this, the Com- .
mi ssion took a histor ic decisi on to use only
EVMs for the Lok Sabha electi on in 2004.
More than 1 millio n EVMs were used in this
electi on.
Elec~ronic Votin g Mach ine An Electr onic
Voting Machi ne (EVM) is a simpl e elect ronic
devi ce u sed to record votes in pla ce ofbaU ot
paper s and boxes which were used earlie r in
conve ntiona l voting system . The advan tages
of the EVM over the tradit ional baUot paper /
ballot box system are given h ere:
(i) It elimin ates the possib ility of invali d
and doubt ful votes which , in many
cases, are the root cause s of contro versies and electi on petitio ns.
(ii) It makes the proces s of count ing of votes
mu ch faster than the conve ntion al
system .
(iii) It reduces to a great exten t the quantity of paper used thus saving a large
numb er of trees makin g the proce ss
eco-friendly.
(iv) It redu ces cost of printi ng (almo st nil)
as only one sheet of ballot paper is
requir ed for each Pollin g Statio ntl •

Votin g Proce dure Votin g is by secret ballot. Pollin g statio ns are usuall y set up in
public institu tions, such as schoo ls and communi ty halls. 1b enabl e as many electo rs as
8Genera] Elections 2009: Reference Handbook, Press
Inform ation Bureau, Government of India, p. 181.

576 j! Indian Polity
possib le to vo te, the offic ia ls of the Elect ion
Co mmi ssio n try to e nsure that there is a polling stat io n within two kilom e tres of every
voter, and that no polling station s should have
to dea l with morc tha n 1200 vote rs. Each polling stat ion is ope n for a t least eight h ours on
the day of the e lecti on .
On enteri ng the polli ng statio n , the electo r is checked aga in st the electo ra l roll 9 , and
identity docu me n t is verified, indelible ink
is applied o n the le ft forefi nge r a nd a vo ter
sli p is issued a nd the vote r is all owed to cast
h is/ her vote by activati ng the ba ll ot butto n
in the control un it by the p res id ing officer.
Supe rvis ing Electi ons T he Election Comm iss ion a ppoi nts a large number of Observers to
ensu re th at th e cam pa ign is co nducted fa irl y,
and tha t people are free to vote as they choose.
Election expend iture Observers kee ps a check
o n the a mount that each ca ndidate and party
spends on the elect ion.

Med ia Coverage In order to br in g as much
tra nspare ncy as possibl e to the electora l p rocess, the media are enco u raged a nd provided
with fa ci lit ies to cover the elect io n , altho ugh
subject to main ta in in g the sec recy of th e
vote. Med ia perso ns are give n spec ial passes
to enter poll ing stat ion s to cove r the po ll process an d th e co u nting hall s dur ing the actu al
coun ting of votes.
Med ia are a lso free to conduct opi nion
po ll s. The Electio n Co mmi ss ion has st ipulated that the results of opin ion polls ca nn ot
be publi shed betwee n t\vo days before the start
of poll ing an d after the close of poll in any
of the co nst ituencies. Si m ila rly, the res ults of
ex it poll s can on ly be p ublish ed after ha lf a n
s.rhe electora l roll is a li st of all people in the
constitu ency who are reg istered to vote in
Indian elections. Only those people with their
names on the electoral roll arc allowed to vote.
The electora l roll is nom13 l1 y rev ised every yea r
to add the names of those who are to tum 18 on
the 1st January of that year or have moved into
a co nstituency and to remove the na mes of those
who have died or moved out of a constitue ncy.

hour of the end of polling hou rs on the last
day o f poll.
Counti ng of Vot es Afte r th e polling has fin ished, the votes cast in the EVM are counted
under the su pervision of Retu rn ing Officers
an d Observe rs ap p o in ted by th e Elect io n
Co mm ission. Afte r the cou n ting of votes is
ove r, the Retu rni ng Office r declares th e name
of the ca ndidate, to who m th e la rgest number
of votes have been give n , as the win ner a nd
as hav in g bee n return ed by the co nst ituen cy
to th e co ncern ed House.
Electio ns to the Lok Sab ha are ca rried out
us in g a first-past-the- post electo ral sys tem.
The coun try is split up into separate geogra phi ca l areas, known as cons ti tue n cies,
and the electo rs ca n cast o ne vote each fo r
a ca n didate, the wi n ne r being the candidate
who gets the max im um votes.
Electio ns to the State Asse mbli es a re carr ied out in the sa me ma nner as for the Lok
Sabh a election, with th e states a nd un io n territor ies d ivid ed into Sin gle- me mber co nstitue ncies, an d the first-past- the-post electora l
syste m used .
Th e Electi o n Co mmi ss ion co mp iles th e
co mpl ete list of me mbe rs elected a nd issues
an approp ri ate Notificat ion fo r th e due co nstituti o n of the House. With th is, the process
of elections is complete a nd the Pres iden t,
in case of the Lok Sab ha, a nd the Gove rnors
o f th e co n ce rn ed states, in case of Sta te
Assembli es, ca n then co nvene thei r respective
Houses to hold their sess io ns.
Elect ion Petit io ns Any elector o r ca nd idate
ca n fi le a n election pet it io n if h e or she
th in ks there has bee n ma lpractice durin g
the electio n. An election petition is not an
ordin ary civil suit, but treated as a con test
in wh ich the whole constitu en cy is in volved .
Electi on petitio ns are tried by the High Court
of the state in vo lved, a nd if uphe ld ca n eve n
lead to the restagi ng of the elect ion in tha t
co nstituen cy.
Till now, seve ntee n ge nera l elect io ns have
been he ld to the Lok Sab ha. The res ults of
these electio ns are summ arised in Th bl e 80. 1.

__________________________________________________________

~8~e~ro~o~n~s_~_"A sn

Table 80.1 Results of Lok Sabha Elections
Gen!;'fi'll Elections (YeM)

Elective Seats

Seilts won by Parties

_.-

489

Congress 364, Communist 16, Socialist 12, KMPP 9, Jana Sangh 3.

Second (1957)

494

Congress 371. CommuniSt 21. Praja Socialist 19. Jane Sangh 4.

Third (1962)

494

Congress 361 , Communist 29, Swatantra 18, Jana Sangh 14,
Praja Socialist 12, Socialists 6.

First (1952)

~~~-~-~---=--- ~~.

-------

Fourth (1 967)

520

Congress 283, 5watantra 44. J'."na
- s-.-n"'g'·h· 35, CP1 23. CPM 19,

~ ]

Sanyukt8 Socialist 23. Prajs Socialist 13.

518

Congress 352, CPM 25, CPI 24 , DMK 23, Jana Sangh 21, Swatantra 7,
Socialist 5.

542

Janata 298, Congress 154, CPM 22, CPI 7, AIAOMK 18.

Seventh (1980)

542

Congress 353, Janata (Secular) 41, Janata 31, CPM 36, CPI 11 . OMK 16.

E;ghl (1984)

542

Congress

Ninth (1989)

543

Congress 197, Janata Oal 141 . SJP 86 , CPM 32, CP112. AIAOMK 1"
TOP 2.

Tenth (1991)

543

Congress 232. BJP 119. Janata o al 59. CPM 35. CPI 13. TOP 13.
AIAoMK 11 .

Eleventh (1996)

543

BJP 161 . Congress 140, Janata Oal46, CPM 32 , TMCM 20, OMK 17,
SP 17. TOP 16, SS 15, CP1 12, asp 11.

[ welfth ( 1998)

543

BJP 182. Congress 141 , CPM 32, AIAOMK 18. TOP 12. SP 20.
Samata 12. RJD 17.

Thirteenth (1999)

543

aJP 182. Congress 114, CPM 33 , TOP 29, SP 26. JO (U) 20, 5S 15,
SSP 14, OMK 12, 8JO 10, AIAOMK 10.

Fourteenth (2004)

543

Fifteenth (2009)

543

Congress 206. BJP 116, SP 23, asp 21 . JO(U) 20, Trinamool 19, oMK
18, CPM 16. aJO 14, Shiv Sena 1" NCP 9, AIAOMK 9, TOP 6, RlD 5,
CPI 4, RJD 4, SAD 4.

SbC1eenth (2014)

543

BJP 282. Congress 44. AIAOMK 37. Trlnamool 34, BJO 20, Shiv Sena
18, TOP 16. TRS 11. CPM 9. YSR Congress 9, NCP 6, UP 6, SP 5,
AAP .4. RJO 4, SAD 4.

fSeventeenth (20 19)

543

BJP 303, Congress 52, DMK 23, Trlnamool 22, YSR Congress 22,
Shiv Sena 18, JD (U) 16, BJD 12, asp la, TRS 9. UP 6, NCP 5, SP 5.

Fifth (1971)

~ - --

Sl><1h (1977)

- --

I

41S~ TOP 28. CPM 22 . CPI6, Janata 10~I~oMK 12. BJP 2 .•

Congress 145. BJP 138, CPM 43, SP 36. RJO 24, BSP 19, DMK 16.

Shiv Sena 12. BJO II, CPI to.

---

"Note: The seats won by other smaller parties and independents are not Included in this Table.

°1

578

f!

Indian Polity

Table 80.2

Articles Related to Elections at a Glance

Article No

Subject matter

324.

Superintendence, direction and control of elections to be vested In an Election Commission

325. grounds
No person to

1nellg1b1e;;for
;;:I;;;;;;;-;;;;;~;;::;~
nduoIon

be
of ....iglon, race, caste

01'_-_.___ ...,;______.;._____-'-__.....1

326.

Elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assemblies of states to be on the basis of
adult suffrage

327.

Power of Parliament to meke proyIsIon wtlh resped: to eIaCIforlI: to L8gI'sIetUres

328.

Power of Legislature of a state to make provision wi th respect to elections to such Legislature

329.

Bar to Interference by courts In etedoral matters

329A.

Special provision as to elections to Parliament in the case of Prime Minister and Speaker (Repealed)

,

CHAPTE,R

81

REPRESENTATION OF THE
PEOPLE ACT, 1950

)

)

)

Articles 81 and 170 of the Constitution of
India lay down the maximum number of seats
in Parliament and in Legislative Assemblies
of States and also certa in prin ciples to b e
followed in allocating seats in the House of
People among the States and in the State Legislative Assemblies, but have left the actual allocat ion of such seats to be provided by the law.
Similarly, Article 171 of the Constitution of
India lays down the maximum and minimum
number of seats in the Legislative Council of a
State, and also specify the va rious m ethods in
which the seats shall be filled, but the actual
number of seats to be filled by each such
m ethod has been left to be provided by law.
Therefo re~ the Representation of the People
Act, 1950, was enacted to provide fQr_ th~ aJlocation of seats in the House of the People and
in the Legislative Assemblies and Legislative
Councils of States.
The Act also sought to confer on the President the powers to delimit, after co nsultation
with the Election Commi ssion, the various
con stituencies for the purpose of election s
to fill seats in the House of the People and
in the Legislative Assemblies and Legislative
Councils of States.
The Act further provided for the registration of electors for Parliamen tar y Constituen cies and for the Assembly and Council
Con sti tuencies, and the qualification s and
disqualifications for such regi stration.

Election Laws

The Act also makes the following, lother
provisions relating to the elections:
1. Election officers like chi ef electoral office rs, district election officers, elettoral
registration officers and so on. ~)
2. Manner of filling seats in the Cdti.n
, ' cil of
States to be fill ed by re presentatives of
union territories.
3. Local autho rities for purposes ~f elections to the State Legislative Coun cils.
4. Barring t4e jurisdiction of civil courts.

REPRESENTATION OF THE
PEOPLE ACT, 1951
The Representation of the People Act, 1950
did n ot contain all the provisions relating
to elections but merely provided for the
allocation of seats in and the delimitatio n of
con stitu en cies for th e purpose of elections to
the House of People and Legislatures of States,
the qualifications of voter at such election
a nd the pre parations of electoral rolls. .u
The provisions for the actua l conduct of
electio n s to the Houses of Parliament and
to the Hou se or Hou ses of the Legislature of
each State, the qualifications and disqualificati on s for the membership of these Houses,
the corrupt pra cti ces and other ele ction
offe nces, and the decisio n of election disputes were all left to be made in a subsequent
measure. In order to provide for these provisions, th e Representation of1he' people 'Act,
1951 was en acted. .

580 ;

Indian Polity

Broadly speak ing, thi s Act co ntain s provision s re lating to the following electora l
matters:
1. Qu a lifica ti o ns and di squa lifi ca ti ons for
me mbership of Parliament and State

Legisla tures

2. Not ifica tio n of general elections
3. Adm inistrative machinery for the co nduct
of e lection s
4 . Registrati o n of poli tica l part ies
5 . Co nduct of e lection s: The co nduct of election s include t he followin g matte rs:
(a) No mination o f cand idates
(b) Ca ndidates and the ir age nts
(e) Genera l procedure at electio ns
(d) The poll
(e) Countin g of vo tcs
(f) Mu ltipl e elections
(g) Publication of elect ion resu lts a nd
nomination s
(h) Declaration of assets and liabilities
(i) Election ex pe nses
6. Free suppl y of certain material to ca ndidates of recogni sed politi ca l parti es
7. Dispu tes regardin g elections: The provision s of th e Act with respect to di sputes
regarding elections are rel ated to the
fonowing matters:
(i) Prese ntation of election petitions to
Higb Court
(ii) Trial of e lection pe ti tions
(iii) Withdrawal and abatement of election petitions
(iv) Appeals to Supreme Court
(v) Costs and security for costs
8. Corrupt practi ces and electora l offences
9. Powers of Election Co mmi ss ion in co nnection with inquiries as to disqualifications of me mbers.
10. Bye-e lections and time limit for filling
vacancies.
11 . Misce llan eous provis ions relating to
elections.
12. Barring the jurisdiction of civil courts.

t DELIMITATION ACT, 2002
Articles 82 and 170 of the Constitution of
Indi a provide for rea djustm e nt a nd the

divi sion of each Sta te into te rritorial co nstituencies (Parlia m e ntary co nst itu e ncies
a nd Asse mbly con stituencies) on the basis
of th e 2001 ce nsus by suc h a uthority and
in such manner as Parliame nt may, by law,
determine.
Furthe r, Articles 330 and 332 of the Constitution of Indi a provide for re-fi xing the
numbe r of sea ts rese rved for the Sched uled
Castes an d t he Scheduled 1Tibes in the House
of th e Peo pl e and Leg islative Asse mbli es of
the Sta tes on the basis of the 2001 ce nsus.
The previou s del imitatio n o f Pa rli a me ntary and Asse mbly co n stitu e nc ies is ba sed
on the 1971 ce nsus. The uneven growth of
population in different con stitue ncies in differe nt parts of the country as well as \V"ithin
the sa me State as al so co ntinuou s migration
of people / e lectorate from one place to other
espec iall y fro m rura l area s to urban area s
have res ulted in st rikingly diffe ring sizes
of e lecto ral co n stituen c ies eve n within the
same State.
Therefore, the De lim itation Act, 2002 L, was
e na cted to set up a De limitation Commission
for th e purpose of effecting delimitation on
the basi s of the 2001 ce n sus so as to co rrec t
the aforesaid di sto rtio n in th e sizes of electora l co nstituen c ies.

OTHER ACTS RELATING TO
ELECTIONS
1. Parliament ( Preve ntion of Disqual-

ifi cation ) Act, 1959 declares that certain
offices of profit under the Government
sha ll not di squalify the holders thereof
for being c hosen as (or for being) mem·
bers of Parliament.
2 . Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 'Tribes
Orders (Amendment) Ac t, 1976 provid es for th e in c lu s ion in , and th e
exclusion from, the lists of Scheduled
Castes and Sc hedul ed 1Tibes, of certai n
castes and tribes, for the readjustment
'Earlier, the Delimit.1.tion Acts we re e nacted in 1952,
1962 and 1972 .

£J~ction Laws ~ 581
of representation of parJiamentary and
assembly con stituencies.
3. Government of Union Territories Act,
1963.
4 . .Government of National Capital Territory
of Delhi Act, 1991. . ' .
..
5. Presjdential and Vice-Presidential
Elections Act, 1952 regulates certain
matters relating to or connected with
elections to the offices of the President
and Vice-President of India.

t RULES RELATING TO ELECTIONS

1. Registration of Electors Rules, 1960 provide for the preparation and publication
of electoral rolls.
2_ Conduct of Elections Rules, ]961 facilitates conduct of fair and free elections
to ~he ParHament and State Legislatures.
3. Prohibition of Simultaneous Membership
Rules, 1950.
4. Members of Lok Sabha (Disqualification
on Ground of Defection) Rules, 1985.
5. Members of Rajya Sabha (Disqualification
on·Ground of Defection) Rules, 1985.

6. Presidential and Vice-Presidential
Elections Rules, 1974. 2
7. Members of Lok Sabha (Declaration of
Assets and Liabilities) Rules, 2004.
8. Members of Rajya Sabha (Declaration of
Assets and Liabilities) Rules, 2004.

TORDERS RELATING TO

l ELECTIONS

1. Election Symbols (Reservation and

Allotment) Order, 1968 provides for the
specification, reservation, choice and
allotment of 'symbOls at elections . in
par1iamentary ~ and assembly constituencies, for the recognition of political
parties in relation thereto.
2. Registration of Political Parties (furnishing of Additional Particulars) Order,
1992 provides for furnis hin g of additional particulars by associations or
bodies of individual citizens of India
seeking registration as a political party
with the Election Commission of India.

1'hcse Rules repealed the earlier Presidential and
Vice-Presidential Elections Rules, 1952.

.

CHAPTER"
.,

82

COM MITT EES RELATED TO
ELEC TOR AL REFORMS
The variou s comm ittees an d co mmi ssions
which have exa mined our electo ral system ,
electio n machi nery as we ll as the electio n process and suggested refonn s are menti oned here.
1. Joint Parlia menta ry Comm ittee on
Amen dment s to Electi on Laws (1971-72).
2. Thrku nde Comm ittee was apPoi nted in
1974 by Jaya Praka sh Naray an (JP) during his "'!btat Revolution" movement. This
unoffi cial co mmittee submi tted its report
in 1975.
3. Dines h Goswami Comm ittee on Electo ral
Reform s ( 1990)
4. Vahra Comm ittee on the Nexus betwe en
Crime and Politic s (1993)
5. Electio n Comm ission oflnd ia Recom mendation s on Electo ra l Reform s (1998) .
6. Jndra jit Gupta Comm ittee on State
Fundi ng of Electi ons ( 1998)'
7. Law Comm ission of Ind ia 170th Repor t
on Refon n of t he Electo ra l Laws (1999 )
8. Natio n a l Comm ission to Revie w t he
Worki ng of the Const itution (2000-2002)It was heade d by M.N. Venka tachaHah.
lin 1998, the BJP-Ied Govern ment appoin ted an
eight-m ember comm ittee on state fundin g of
electio ns under the chairm anship of Indraji t Gupta,
a former Home Minister. The comm ittee submit ted
its report in 1999. It upheld the a rgume nt for
introdu ction of state fundin g of elections. It stated
that state fundin g of electio ns is constit utiona lly
and legaUy justified and is in public interes t.

Electoral Reforms

9. Electi on Comm ission of India Repor t on
Propo sed Electo ral Re form s (2004 ).
10. Seco nd Admi ni strative Refor ms Commissio n of Indi a Repor t on Ethics in
Gover nance (2007) . It was heade d by
Veera ppa Moily.
a Comm ittee (Core Co mmitt ee) was
Thnkh
.
11
appoi nted in 2010 to look into the whole
gamu t of the electi on laws and electo ra l

reform s.
12. J.S. Vemla Comm ittee Repo'r t on Amen dments to Crimi na l Law (201 3).
13. Law Comm ission of India 244th Repor t
on Electo ra l Disqu alifica tions (2014).
14. Law Comm ission of India 255th Repor t
on Electo ral Refor ms (2015).
Based on the recom m e ndatio ns made by
the above Comm ittees and Comm ission s,
va rious refo rms have been introd u ced in our
e lector a l system , e lectio n mach inery and
electi on proces s. These can be studie d under
the follow ing four heads.
• Electo ral reform s before 1996
• Electo ral reform s of 1996
• Electo ral reform s after] 996
• Electo ral reform s si n ce 2010

TELECTORAL REFORMS

l BEFORE 1996

Lower ing of Voting A2e The 61st Const itutional Amen dmen t Act of 1988 reduce d the
voting age from 21 years to 18 years for the Lok
Sabha as well as the assem bly electio ns. This
was done in order to provid e to the unrep resented youth of the count ry an oppor tunity to

I

r

,
express their feelings and h elp them become a
part of politica l process.

\

Deput ation to Election Commission in 19892 ,
a provision was made that the officers and the
staff engaged in preparation, revision and
correctio~ 0,£ electoral rolls for elections are
deemed to be on deputation to the Election
Commission for the pe riod of such employme nt. These personnel , during that period,
would be unde r the co ntrol , supe rinte nden ce
and discipline of the Election Co mmission .

Increase in Number of Proposers In 1989 3 ,
th e number of electors who are required to
sign as proposers in nomination pape rs for
elections to the Rajya Sabha and state legisla:;:;;I
tive council has been increased to 10 per cent
of the electors of theconstituen cy or ten such
electors, whi chever is less. Thi s was done in
order to preve nt non-serious ca ndidates from
I;'==-"""-'""'fc ontesti ng frivolously.
Electron ic Vot in g Mac h ine s In 1989 4 , a
provision was made to facilitate th e u se of
Electronic Voting' Machines (EVMs) in elections. The EVMs were used for the first time
in 1998 on experimental basis in selected constituencies in the e lectio ns to the Assembli es
of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Delhi. The
EVM s were used for the first time in the gene'r al elections (entire sta te) to the Assembly
of Goa in 1999.

,

.,

,\

\

Booth Capturing In 19895 , a provision was
made for adj oii rnmeO
nt of poll' or counte rm anding of e lection s in case of booth capturing. Booth capturing includes: (i) seizure of a
poHing station and making polling authorities
's urrender ballot papers or voting machines
(ii) taking possession of polling station and
lallowing only one's own supporters to exercise
th e ir"franchise (iii) threatening a nd preventing "any elector from going to polling station
a'i'1 'd (iv) seizure of the place being used for
couI?ting of votes. .
2Representarion of the People (Amendme nt) Act of
1988, with effect from 1989.

'1b;d. \
~Ib id.

5Ibid.

583

Elector's Photo Identit y Card (EPIC) The
u se of electors' photo id e ntity ca rds by
the Election Commission is surely making
th e electo ral process sim ple, smoother and
quicker. A dec ision was taken by the Election
Com mi ssion in 1993 to issue photo identity
cards to electors throughout the co untry to
check bogu s voting and impe rso na tion of
electors at elections. The electoral roll is
th e basis for issue of EPICs to the registered
electors 6 •

~ ELECTORAL REFORMS OF 1996
In 1990, the Nat ion a l Front Government
headed by v.P. Singh appointed a committee
on electoral reforms under the chairman ship
of Dinesh Goswami, the the n Law Minister.
The Committee was asked to study the electoral system in deta il and suggest measures
for remedying the drawbacks within it. The
Committee, in its report submitted in 1990
itself, made a n umber of proposals on electoral reform s. Some of these recommendations were implemented in 1996 7 • These are
explained h e re.
List ing of Names of C a ndidates The ca ndi·
dates contest ing e lections a re to be classified
into three ca tegories for the purpose of listing
of their nam es. They a re
(i) Ca ndidates of recogn ised political parties
(ii) Ca ndidates of registered-unrecognised
politi cal parties
(iii) Other (independent) ca ndidates
Their names in th e li st of con testing ca ndidates and in the ballot pape rs h as to appea r
separatel y in the above order an d in each
category these have to be arranged i n th e
alphabetical orde r.
Disq ual ification for Insulting the National
Honour Act A perso n who is convicted for
the follow i ng offen ces under the Preve ntion
of I nsults to Natio nal Honou.r Act of 1971 is
disqualified to contest in the elections to the
Parlia ment and state legislature for 6 yea rs.
6Annual Report 2013-14 , Ministry of Law and
Justice, Government of India, p. 67.
1 Representation of til e People (A m cndmcllt) Act, 1996.

I

584

If!

Ind;an PaUry

(i) Offence of ins ul ting t he Nat iona l Flag
(ii) Offence of insulting the Co nst itution of
India
(iH) Offence of p reventing the si ngi ng of
Nat ional An the m
Prohibition on the Sale of liquor No liquor
or other intoxicants arc to be sold or given
or distributed at a ny shop, eating place, hotel
o r a ny other place whether publi c or private
within a polling area during th e pe riod of 48
hours end ing with the hour fixed for the co nclusion of poll.
Number of Proposers The nomination of
a can d idate in a Parliamentary or asse mbl y
constituency shoul d be subscribed by 10
registered e lectors of the co nstituency as
proposers, if the candida te is n ot sp onsored
by a recogn ised politi ca l party. In the case of
a cand idate sponsored by a recogn ised politica l party, only one proposer is required. This
was done in ord er to disco urage non-serious
peopl e from contesti ng the elections.
Death of a Candidate Ear l ier, in case
of death of a co ntest i ng can d idate befo re
the actual po lli ng, the e lectio n used to be
cou n termanded. Co nseque ntl y, the e lectio n
process had to start a ll ove r again in th e concerned const it ue ncy. But now, the electio n
wou ld not be countermanded on the deat h
of a co n testing ca ndidate before t he actual
polling. However, if the deceased ca ndidate
be longed to a recognised politi ca l party, the
party co nce rn ed wo uld be give n an option to
propose another candidate with in seven days.
Time Limit for By-Elections Now, by-elections
are to be held within six months of occurrence
of the vacancy in a ny House of Parliament or
a sL:1te legislature. But, th is condition is not
app li cab le in two cases:
(i) Where t he remainder of the term of the
member whose vacancy is to be fill ed is
less than one year; or
(ii) When the Election Comm iss ion in consultation wit h the Ce ntra l Government,
ce rtifies t hat it is d iffi cult to hold the
by-electio ns within the sa id period.

Holiday to Employees on the Polling Day The
registered voters emp loyed in any trade, business, industry or any other establish ment are
entit led to a paid holiday on the polling day.
This ru le appli es even to the da il y wagers.
However, th is ru le is not applicab le in the
case of a voter whose absence may ca use
danger or substantial loss in respect of the
e mpl oyment in which he/ she is engaged.

Contestants Restricted to Two Constituencies A ca ndidate wou ld not be el igible
to co ntest from morc than two Parlia me ntary or assembly co nsti tuen cies at a general
electio n o r at the by-electio ns whi c h are
h eld simu ltaneou s ly. Simi lar re st ri ct ion s
are im posed for biennial e Jections and byelectio n s to the Rajya Sabha a nd the sta te
legislative council s.
Prohibition of Arms Ent ering into t hr:
neighbo urh ood of a polling sta tion with any
kind of arms is to be co nside red a cognizab le offence. But, t hese provi sion s are not
a pplica ble to the returning officer, presid ing
office r, a ny police officer or any olher perso n
appointed to maintain peace and order at the
polli ng sta tion.
Effective Campaigning Period Reduced T he
minimum gap betwee n th e last date for with drawa l of ca ndidature and the polling date
has been reduced from 20 to 14 days.

j

ELECTORAL REFORMS
AFTER 1996

Presidential and Vice Presidential Elections In
19971, the number of electo rs as proposers and
seco nders for contesting election to the office
of the Pres ide nt was in creased fro m 10 to 50
and to th e office of the Vice President from 5
to 20. Further; the amount of secu rity deposit
was increased from f2,SOO to fJS,OOO for contesting elect io n to both the offices of Pres iden t
and Vice-Preside n t to disco urage frivo lous
ca ndidates.
Bprcsidclltial O/ul Vice-Prcside1ltial
(Amendment) Act, 1997.

Elecl"iolls ·

flea.r.' Ref.rm,
Requisitioning ofStafffot<Elec tion Duty ' In
19989 , a provision was made whereby the
employees of local authorities, natio nalised
banks, universities, LIC, government undertak in gs and other government-aided insti tutions can be requisitioned for deployment on
election duty.
Voting throua:h Postal Ballot In 1999 10 , a
provision was m ade for voting by certain
classes of persons through posta l ballot.
Thus, any class of persons ca n be notified
by the Election Com mission, in consu ltation with the government, and the perso ns
belonging to such notified class can give
their votes by postal ballot, and not in a ny
other manner, at elections in their co nst ituency or constituencies.

,,

'-\

"

'-

Facility to Opt to Vote Through Proxy In
11
2003 , the faci lity to opt to vote through
prox y was provided to the service voters
belonging to the Armed Forces and m embers
belonging to a Force to which provisions of
the Army Act apply. Such service voters who
opt to vote through proxy h ave to appoint a
proxy in a prescribed format and intimate the
Returning Officer of the co nstituency.
Declaration of Criminal Antecedents, Assets,
etc., by Candidates In 2003, the election
. Com mission issued an order directing every
ca ndidate seeking election to the Parliament
or a State Legislature to furnish on his/ her
n om ination paper the information on the
following matters.
(i) Whether the candidate has been convicted
or acquitted or discharged in any criminal offence in the past? Whether h e/she
was imprison ed or fined?
(ii) Prior to six months of filing nomination,
whether the candidate is accused of any
pending case, of any offence punishable
with impriso nment for two years o r
more, and in which charges were framed
'Represen tation of the People (A mendment) Act, 1996.
I°Representatio n of the People (Amendment) Act, 1999.
llElection Laws (Amendment) Act, 2003 and Conduct
of Elections (Amendment) Rules, 2003.

21 585

or cognizan ce was take n by a court; if
so, the detail s thereof
(iii) The assets (i mmovable, movable, bank
balances, etc.) of a ca ndidate and his/
her spouse and that of depende nts
(iv) Liabilities, if any, part icularly whether
there are any dues of a ny public financial institution or government dues
(v) The educational qua lification s of the
ca ndidate
Furnishing of any fa lse information in the
affi davit is now an electoral offence.
Changes in Rajya Sabha Elections: In 2003,
the fo llowing two changes were introduced
with respect to elect ions to the Rajya Sab ha 12:
(i) Domicile or residency requirement of a
candidate contesting an election to the
Rajya Sabha was removed. Prior to this, a
candidate had to be an elector in the state
from where he/ she was to be elected.
Now, it would be sufficien t if he/she is
an elector in any parliamentary constitu·
ency in the cou ntry.
(ii) Introducing open ballot system, instead
of secret ballot system, for elections to
the Rajya Sabha. This was done to curb
cross-voti ng and to wipe out the role of
money power durin g Rajya Sabha elections. Under the new system, an elector
belonging to a political party has to show
the ballot paper after marking his/ her
vote to a nominated agent of that political party.
Exemption of Travelling Expenditure As per
a provision of 2003 13 , the travelling expenditure incurred by the ca mpaigning leaders
of a political party sh all be exempted from
being included in th e election expe nses of
the candidate.
Free Supply of Electoral Rolls, etc. According
to a 2003 provision l 4 , the Government should
supply, free of cost, the copies of the electoral
12Representation of the People (A mendment) Act, 2003.
i3 E lectioll and Other Related Laws (A mendment) Act,
2003.

14fbid.

586

P

Indian Pality

l ELECTORAL REFORMS SINCE 2010

rolls and other prescr ibed ma teri a l to t he
calldidates of recognised politica l pa rt ies for
the Lok Sabha and Assembly elections. Further,
the Election Commission should suppl y specified items to the voters in the con stituen cies
concern ed or to the ca ndidates set up by the
recogn ised poli tical parties.

Restrictions Imposed on Exit Polls Acco rding

to a 2009 provi sion l3 , conduct ing ex it poll s and

publish ing results of exist polls would be proh_ibited during the election to Lok Sabha and
State Legislative Assem blies. Thus, DO person
shall conduct any exit poll and publish or publi cise by mean s of th e print or electronic media
or di sseminate in any o ther manner, the result
of any ex'lt poll du ring the period notified by
the Election Commission in this regard.
"Exit·poll" is a n opinion survey regarding
how e lectors have voted at a n e lection or how
all th e electors ha ve performed with regard
to the ide n tifica tio n of a politi ca l party or
candida te in an election.

Parties Entitled to Accept Contribution In
2003 15, the polit ica l parti es were entitled to
accept any amount of contribution from any
person or company other tha n a government
company. They have to repOlt any contribution
in excess of'f20,000 to the Electio n Commissio n
for maki ng any claim to any in come tax rel ief.
Besides, the co mpanies would get income tax
exe mption o n the a mount con tributed.
Allocation ofTirne on Electronic Media Under
a 2003 p rovision J6 , t he Electio n Commi ssio n
should allo ca te equitab le sharing of tim e
011 the cable te lev ision netwo rk a nd o ther
elec tron ic med ia during e lections to display
or propagate a ny matter or to address publi c. This allo cation would be dec id ed 011 th e
bas is of the past pe rformance of a recog nised
po li tical party.
Introduction of Braille 5ignage Features in
EVMs T he Comm issi on received representat ion s from the various assoc iations of visually
impaired persons for introducti on of Braille
s ignage features in the EVMs to facilitate the
visually impaired voters to cast their votes
without the help of attendant. The Co mmission
con sidered th e proposal in detail and tri ed the
Brail1e sign age feature in the EVMs during the
bye-election to the Asifnagar Assemb ly Constituency of Andhra Pradesh held in 2004. In 2008,
it was tried in all the assembly co nstituenc ies
of Ncr of Delh i during Assembl y e lections.
The Co mm ission introduced similar Braille
sign age features o n t he Electro n ic Voting
Machines during the Genera l Elections to th e
Fifteenth Lok Sabha (2009) and si multaneous
Assembly election s in some States. 17
15Ib id.
!6 Ibid.
J1Electio n Co mmiss ion of India circular dated 12th

Februa ry, 2009.

Time-Limit for Submitting a Case for Disqualification In 2009 19 , a provis ion was
made for the si mplifi ca tion of th e procedure
for di squalifi catio n of a person found guilty
of corrupt practi ces. It provid ed for a threemonth tim e-limi t within wh ic h the spec ified
authority wi1l ha ve to SUbllli t t he case of a
pe rson found guilty of corrupt pra ctice to the
Pres ident fo r deter mination of the question
of disqualification.
All Officials Included in Corrupt Practice In
2
2009 a provision was made for the inclusion
of all offic ial s, wh ethe r in the government
se rvice o r not , appo in ted or deputed by the
Elect io n Co mmi ss ion in co nn ectio n with the
condu ct of e lections, wit hin the sco pe of corcupt practice of obta ining a ny ass istan ce by a
ca nd ida te fo r the furtherance of th e prospects
of hi s/ he r e lection.

°,

Increase in Security Deposit In 2009 21, th e
amou n t of security deposit to be paid by the
ca ndidates co ntesting e lections to the Lok
Sabha was increased from 'flO,OOO to '{2S,OOO
for the genera l ca ndidates and from '{S,OOO to
18Representatiol1 of the People (Amendment) Act,
2009, with effect from February 1, 2010.
19lbid.
20tlJid.
2l

tbid.

£1ectoral Reforms
fI2,SOO for SC and ST candidates. Simila rly, the

secu rity deposit in the case of elections to the
state legislative assembly was increased from
fS,OOO to fIO,OOO for the general candidates
and from n,soo to ~S,O OO for the SC and ST
ca ndidates. This was done in order to check the
multiplicity of non-serious candidates.
Appellate Authority within the District In
2009 22 , a provision was m ade for appointment
of an appellate a uthority within the district
against the orders of the Electoral Registration
Officers, instead of the Chief Electoral Officer
ofthe state. Thus, a n appeal against any order
of the Electoral Registration Officer of a constituency (during conti nuous updation of the
electoral roll) will now li e before the District
Magistrate or Additional District Magistrate or
E.xecutive Magistrate or District Collector or
an officer of equivalent ra nk. A further appeal
again st any order of the District Magistrate
or Additional District Magistrate will now lie
before the Chief Electoral Officer of the state.
Voting Rights to Citizens of India Living
Abroad In 201023 , a provision was made to
confer voting rights to the citizens of India
residing outside India due to various reasons.
Accordingly, every citizen of India - (a) whose
name is not included in the electoral roll
(b) who has not acquired the citizenship of any
other country (c) who is absent fro m his/her
place of ordinary residence in India owing to
his/her employment, education or oth erwise
outside India (whether temporarily or not) shall be entitled to have his/ her name registered in the electoral roll in the Parliamentary/
Assembly constituen cy in which his/her place
of residence in India as m ention ed in his/her
passp ort is located.
Online Enrolment in the Electoral Roll In
2013, a provision was made for online filing of application s for enrolm ent in the
electoral roll. For this purpose, the Central
Government, after con sulting the Election
Commission, made the rul es known as the
22 Ib id .

2JRepresentarion of the People (Ame ndment) Act, 2010.

~ 587

Registration of the Electors (Amendment)
Rules, 201 3. These rules m ade certa in amendments in the Registration of Electors Rules,
1960.
Introduction of NOTA Option 24 According
to the directions of Supreme Court, the Election Com mission made provision in the ballot
papers/ EVMs for Non e of the Above (NOTA)
option so that the voters who come to the
polling booth and decide not to vote for any
of the candidates in the fray, are able to exercise their right not to vote for such ca ndidates
while maintaining the secrecy of their ballot.
The provision for NorA has been made sin ce
General Elections to State Legislative Assemblies in 2013 and continued in the Gen eral
Elections to State Legislative Assemblies in
2014 along with the Gen eral Elect ions to the
Sixteenth Lok Sabha (2014).
Even if the number of electors opting for
NorA options is more than the number of
votes polled by any of the ca ndidates, th e
ca ndidate who secures th e largest number of
votes has to be declared elected.
Introduction of VVPAT 25 The Voter Verifia bl e Paper Audit Trail is a n independent
system attached with the EVMs that allows
the voters to verify that their votes are cast as
intended. When a vote is cast, a slip is printed
and remains exposed through transparent
window for seve n seconds, showing the serial
number, name and symbol of the cand idate.
Thereafter, the receipt auto matically gets
cut a nd fa ll s into the sealed dropbox of the
VVPAT. The system allows a voter to challenge
his/h er vote on the basis of th e paper receipt.
The law for using VVPATh was amended in
2013. In 2013, the Supreme Court of India had
permitted the ECI to introduce VVPAT in a
phased manner, calling it 'an indispensable
requirement of free and fair elections'. The
Court h ad felt that introducing VVPAT would
en sure the accuracy of the voting system and

a

24Electoral Statistics: Pocket Book 2015, Election
Commission of India, p. 96.
25 India
Votes: The General Elections 2014,
Election Commission of India, p. l B.

588 ,rfY Indian Pality
a lso help in manual co unti ng of votes in case
of d ispute. T he VV PAlS were first used in byeelection to [he Nokse n Assembly Constituen cy
of aga lan d he ld in 20 13.

Persons in Jai lor Pol ice Custody Can Contest Elections In 2013,26 th e Sup reme Co urt
upheld an orde r of th e Patna Hi gh Co urt
declaring that a perso n who ha s no right to
votc by reason of be in g in jailor in poli ce
c ustody, is not a 11 e lecto r a nd is, there fore,
not qual ified to con test the e lection s to the
Pa rl iame n t or the Stale Legi slature. In o rder
to negate th is ord er of the Sup re me CO llrt,
th e fo llowin g two new provisions 27 ha ve been
in cl uded in t he Re presen ta tion of the Peopl e

Act, 195 1:
(i) The first prov ision exp ressly provides
that by reaso n of the prohib ition to
vore (e ithe r du e to in ja il or in poli ce
custody) , a person whose na me has bee n
e nte red in the e lectora l ro ll sha ll not
cease to be a n e lector.
(ii) T he seco nd provis ion expressly provides
th.H a Membe r of Parlia ment or the State
Leg islatu re shall be di squalified o nly if
he l she is so di squalified under the provis ion s contained in the Act and on no
oth e r grou nd.
Conseque ntly, the persons in ja il or in poli ce
custody arc allowed to contest the e lections.

Immediate Disqualification of Convicted MPs
and MLA s In 201 3 ,28 the Supre me Co urt
hel d that chargesheeted Me mbers of Parliament a nd MLA s, on co n viction for offences,
will be immedi a te ly disqua lified from holding me mbe rship of the House without being
given three mo n ths' time for appeal , as was
the case before.
T he concerned Be n ch of the Court struck
down a s un co n stit utiona l Section 8 (4) of
the Representation of the People Act ( 1951 )
th a t a llows convicted lawmakers a t hre emonth pe riod for filing appeal to the higher
26C/r iefElect1011 Commissioner vs- Ion CIW/llddtrr (20 13) .
27 Vidc t.he Re preSe ntalion of the People (A mendment
and " .. Iidal io n) ACl, 2m3.
21lUly T/ro mtrs \'s. Union of IIrdill (201 3).

court and to get a stay of the conviction a nd
se nte nce 29 .
I n ord e r to nulli fy the above ruling of the
Supre me Co urt, the Re prese n tat io n of the
Peop le (Seco nd Amendm e nt and Va lidat ion )
Bill , 2013 was introdu ced in the Parliament.
Howeve r, the Bill was later withd.rawn by the
Government.
Photos of Ca nd idates on EVMs and Ballot
Pa pers 30 Acco rding to an Election Co mmi ss io n order, in any e lection ·be in g he ld afte r
Ma y 1, 20 15, th e ba llot papers and EVM s wi ll
ca r ry the pi cture o f the ca ndida te with hi s o r
her nam e and party sy mbol to avoid co n fus ion among t he e lectorates in co nst iwenc ies
where nam esakes are co ntesting.
The Co mmi ss ion has noted that there a re
ma ny cases where candidates with sa me o r
s imilar nam es co ntest from the sa m e co nstitu e ncy. Alt ho ugh appro pria te suffixes are
added to th e names of ca ndidates in the eve nt
of two o r more ca ndidates havi ng sa me name,
th e Co mmi ss io n co ns ide rs that a ddi t ion a l
measures are required for removing confus ion in the minds of e lectors a t the tim e of
vo ting .
Th e Commiss ion exp lained that if a ca ndidate fa il s to prov ide the ph otograph , it "shall
not be a grou nd for the reject ion of the nOI11 i·
nation of the ca ndidate".
Ceiling on Cash Donations Lowered: In 201 7
budget, t he lim it for anony mous cash donation s by any ind iv idual to a political party
ha s been lowe red from t20,OOO to t2,000. Thi s
mean s that now the political parti es ca nnot
receive more tha n t2 ,000 as cash donations.
Howeve r, they a re not required to inform th e
Election Co mmiss ion of India the detail s of
perso ns who donate unde r t2,OOO. They must
keep reco rds of perso ns making above t2 ,OOO
don a ti o ns.
29T lre Hilldu, -M Ps, MLAs to be disqualified on dale

or criminal co nvi ct i o n ~, July 10,201 3.
30T Ir c ECOllomic Times, "E lect ro n ic Voling Machines
to carry pho tos or ca ndidates : CEC~, Septe mber 9,
2015.

Electoral Reforms

Cap on Corporate Contributions Lifted: In
20] 7 budget, the lim it on corporate co ntri·
butions from 7.5 per ce nt of the n et profit
of a co mpany's past three financial years
ha s been removed. This means that now a
company can donate any amount of money
to a ny political party. Further, the obligation of the co mpany to report such donation s in its profit and loss account ha s also
bee n lifted.
Introduction of Electoral Bonds: In 2018,
the central government notified the Electoral
Bo nd Scheme. This scheme was announced
in the 20] 7 budget. Jt is touted as an alternative to cash donations made to the political
parties. It is aimed at bringing clean money
and substa ntial transparency into the system
of political funding. The salient features of
the scheme are:
(i) The electoral bond means a bond issued
in the nature of promisso ry note whi ch
is a bearer banking instrument and
does not ca rry the name of the buyer or
payee.
(ii) The electoral bonds may be purchased
by a citizen of India or entities incorporated or established in India.
(iii) The electoral bonds can be used for
making donations to only those registered political parties which have
secu red not less than one per cent of
the votes polled in the last general
election to the Lok Sabha or the State
legislative Assembly.
(iv) The electoral bonds can be encashed by
an eligible political party only through
a bank account with the authorized
bank.
(v) The electoral bonds are issued in the
aenomination of fl,OOO, flO,OOO,
n,oo,OOO, no,oo,OOO and n,oo,oo,OOO.
(vi) The information furnished by the buyer
is treated confidential by the authorized
bank and is not to be disclosed to any
authority for any purposes, except when
demanded by a competent court or upon
registration of criminal case by any law
enforcement agency.

'tt 589

Foreign Funding Allowed: In 2018 budget, the
receiving of foreign funds by the political parties has b.e en allowed. In other words, the political parties ca n now receive funds from the
foreign companies. Accordingly, the Foreign
Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010, has been
amended. Under this amendment, the definition of a foreign company ha s been modified.
Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 2021: This
Amendment Act provided fo r the following
electoral reform:
(i) It enab led the linking of electoral roll
data with the Aadhaar ecosystem in
order to curb the menace of multiple
enrolment of the same person in different places.
(ii) It specified the 1st January, 1st Aprii,
1st July and 1st October in a calendar
year as qualifying dates in relation to
the preparation or revision of electoral
rolls. Before this, only the 1st January
of the year was the qualifying date in
this regard.
(iii) It allowed spouses of service voters3l
to cast their vote in person or through
postal ballot. 'Ib this effect, it substituted
' the word 'wife' with the word 'spouse'
in order to make the election laws
gender·neutraL
(iv) It enabled the requisition of premises that
are needed for the purpose of cou nting,
storage of voting ma chines (including
VVPA'IS) and poll-related material after
a poll has taken place and also for the
purpose of accommodation of security
forces and polling personnel. Before this,
the requisition of premises was allowed
for the purpose of being used as polling
stations or storage of ballot boxes after
a poll has taken place. In other words,
this Amendment Act has expanded the
grounds for the requisition of premises.
J1Service voters include those holding a service
qualification, such as members of the armed forces
or central government employees posted outside
India , registered in their resident constituency
and their spouses living with them.

"

CHAPTER

83

t MEANING
Vot ing b ehaviou r is a lso known as electoral
beha viour. ft is a form of politica l b ehaviour.
It implies the behaviou r of voters in the context of e lect ions i n a democrati c political
syste m .
Voting behav iour (or th e study of votin g
behav iour) is d efi ned in the fo ll owing way:
Plano and Riggs: "Vot in g be haviour is a field
of stu dy co ncerned with the ways in wh ich
people tend to vote in public election s and th e
reasons why they vote as they do. H
Gordon Marshall: "The study of voting be haviour inva riabl y fo cuses on the determinants
of why peop le vo te as they do and how they
arri ve at the deci sio ns they make",1
Oinam Kulabidhu : "Voti ng beha viou r may
be defined as the behaviou r that exp li citly
refl ects vote r' s choices, preferen ces, alternat ives, ideologies, con ce rns, agreements, and
programmes in respect of vario us iss ues,
questions p e r tainin g to th e society and
nation~. z

t SIGNIFICANCE
Psephology, a branch of p ol it ical sc ience,
deals with the sci enti fi c study of voting b ehavio ur. Thi s is a new term popularised by the
IGordon Marshall, Oxford Dictionary of Sociology,

First Indian Edition, 2004, p. 696.
20inam Ku labidbu, Electoral Politics in Ma nipur,
1980- 1995 ( Un published Ph.D. Thes is submitted to
the Manipur Un iversity, 1998).

Voting Behaviour

America n po l iti ca l sc ien tists and politi cal
soc iologi sts.
Th e reco rded hi sto ry of voting goes ba ck,
at least, to the Greek Po li s. Th e modern word
for th e study of vo ting behavi our, pse phology,
derives fro m the classical Greek ' Pse phos',
the piece of pottery on which certa in votes,
mainly about the ba nishme nt of those seen
as dangerous to the state, were inscribed.3
The study of vo t ing behaviour is signifi can t
fo r th e fonowing reaso ns:"
1. It helps in comp rehending the process of
politi cal socia li sat ion.
2. It helps in exa mi ning the internal isa tion
of democra cy as a va lu e a mo ng the e li te
as wen as ma sses.
3. It emphasises the real impact o f revolutionary ballot box.
4 . It e nables to throw light as to how far the
electo ra l poli ti cs co ntinue or break with
the pa st.
5. It he lps to meas u re whether it is modern
or primordial in the co n text of po li tical
development.
Acco rdin g to N.G.S. Kini, voting behav io ur
can be rega rded as:
I. A mode of iegitimi sing democratic r ul e;
2. In sta nci ng "pa rti ci pa tion" in the political
process involving integration into th e
poli ti ca l community;
3. Insta ncing a n act of decision-making;
)David Robertson, TIle Penguin Dictiollary of Politics,
Second Ed ition, 1993, p. 485.
4 K .R. Acha rya (Ed.), Perspectives 0 11 llidian GOllernment and Politics, Second Edition, 1991, S. Ch and &
Company Ltd. , p. 403.

Voting Behaviour

4. A role-action involving definite political
orientation embedded in a particular
type of political culture; or
5. A direct relation of the individual citizens
to the formal government.

t DETERMINANTS
Indian sOciety is highl y diversified in nature
and composition. Hence, voting behaviour in
India is determined or influenced by multiple
factors. These several factors can be divided,
into two broad categories, namely, socioeconomic factors and political factors. These
are explained below:
I. Caste: Caste is an important factor influencing the behaviour of voters. Politicisation
of caste and caste ism in politics has been a
remarkable feature of Indian politics. Rajni
Kothari, an eminent political analyst, said
"Indian politics is casteist, and caste is politicised While formulating their election strategies, the political parties always take into
account the factor of caste.
Paul Brass has very-well explained the role
of caste factor in the Indian voting behaviour
in the following way: "At the 10callevel, in the
country side, by far the most important factor
in voting behaviour remains caste solidarity.
Large and important castes in a constituency
tend to back either a respected member of
their caste or a political party with whom
their caste members identify.s
H
•

2. Religion: Religion is another significant
factor which influences the electoral behaviour. Political parties indulge in communal
propaganda and exploit the religious sentiments of the voters. The existence of various
communal parties has further added to the
politicisation of religion. Despite India being
a secular nation, no political party ignores
the influence of religion in electoral politics.
3. Language: Linguistic considerations of
the people influence their voting behaviour.
sPaul R. Brass, The Politics of India Since Independence,
Second Edition, Cambridge University Press,
pp.97-9.8.

~ 591

During elections, the political parties arouse
the linguistic feelings of the people and try
to influence their decision-making. The reorganisation of states (in 1956 and later) on
language basis clearly reflects the significance
~f language factor in Indian politics. The rise
of some political parties like DMK in 'Tamil
Nadu and TDP in Andhra Pradesh can be
attributed to the linguism.
4. Region: Regionalism and sub-regionalism
play an important role in voting behaviour.
These parochial feelings of sub-nationalism
led to the emergence and perpetuation of
regional parties in various states. These
regional parties appeal to the electorate on the
ground of regional identities and regional sentiments. Sometimes, the secessionist parties
call for the boycott of elections.
5. Personality: The charismatic6 personality
of the party leader plays an important role in
electoral behaviour. Thus, the towering image
of Jawaharlal Nehru, Indira Gandhi, Rajiv
Gandhi, Jay Prakash Narayan, Atal Bihari
Vajpayee and Narendra Modi has significantly
influenced the electorate to vote in favour of
their parties. Similarly, at the state level also,
the charismatic personality of the regional
party leader has been a significant factor of
popular support in the elections.
6. Money: The role of money factor cannot
be overlooked in explaining the voting behaviour. Despite the limitations on the election
expenditures, crores of rupees are spent on
elections. The voters seek money or liquor
or goods in return for their votes. In other
words, 'votes' are freely exchanged for 'notes'.
However, money can influence the decisions
of the voters only in the normal circumstances
and not in a wave election.
Paul Brass has very-well explained the
meaning of a wave election in the follOwing
way: itA wave election is one in which a clear
tendency begins to develop among the electorate in a single direction and in favour of a
national party or its leader. It is based upon
6'Charisma' means exceptional and attractive qualities
of a leader.

•

•

592

If! Indian Polity

an issue or set of issues that tran sce nd local
calc ulation s and coalition and draws the bulk
of the un comm itted and wavering vo ters in
the sa me direction as the word spreads from
7
village to village and tea stall to tea sta W.
7. Performance of the Ruling Party: On the
eve of elections, every political party releases
its election manifesto containing the promises
made by it to the electorate. The performance
of the ruling party is judged by the electorate
on the basis of its election manifesto. Th e
defeat of Co ngress Party in 1977 elections
and that of Janata Party in 1980 elect ions
illustrates that the p erforma nce of the ruling
party influences the voting behaviour. Thu s,
the anti-i ncumbency factor (wh ich mean s di ssatisfaction with the performan ce of the ruling
party) is a determinant of electoral behaviour.

S. Party Identification: Pe rsonal a nd emotiona l associatio n with political parties plays
a ro le in determining voting behav iour.
People who identify themselves with a particular party will always vote for that party irrespective of its omiss ions and commissions.
7 Pau l R.

Brass, Tile 1984 Parliamentary Elections in

Ul'ta r Pradesh, Asian Survey, June, 1986.

9. Ideology: The political ideology professed
by a politica l party has a bea ring on the
decision-making of the voters. So me people in
th e society are committed to ce rtai n ideo logies like communism, capitalism , democracy,
secularism, patriotism, decentrali sa tion and
so on. Such people ge nera Uy support th e
ca ndidates put up by the parties professing
those ideolog ies.
10. Other Factors: In addition to the aboveexplained factors, there a re also va riou s other
factors whi ch determin e the voting behaviour
of the Inilian electorate. These are me ntioned
below:
(i) Politica l events preceding an election
like war, murder of a leader, co rruption
sca nda ls, etc.
(ii) Economic co ndition s at the time of
election like inflation, food shortage,
un employment, etc.
(iii) Factionalism - a feature of Indian politics from bottom to top leve ls
(iv) Candidate orientatio n
(v) Elect ion campaign
(vi) Political fam il y background
(vii) Role of m edia

CHAPTER

84

Coalition
Government

t MEANING

set-up. It is a phenomenon of a multi-party
government where a number of minority
The term 'coalition' is derived from the
parties join hands for the purpose of running
Latin word 'coalitio-' which means 'to grow
the government. A coalition is formed when
together'. Thus, technically, coa lition means
many splinter groups in a House agree to
the act of uniting parts into one body or
join hands on a common platform by sinking
whole. Politically, coalition means an alliance
their broad differences and form a majority
of distinct political parties.
in the House 4 •
: coalition- politi~s~br .q)alit~.o.~ go~er~,~~nt ;.
, '.
'. ,
has been defined In the followmg way:
.
When several political parties join hands
FEATURES
, '\ to form a government and exercise political
The features or implications of coa lition
'power on the basis of a commpn agreed propolitics or coalition government are very well
gramme/agenda, we can describe the system
summarised
by J.C. Johari in the following
as coalition politics or coalition governmentl,
ways:
Coalitions usually ' Occur in 'm odern par1. Coalitions are formed for the sake of some
liaments when no single political party can
reward, material or psychic.
muster a majority of votes. 'TWo or more
2
.
!\
coalition implies the existence of at
parties, who, have enough elected members
least two partners.
,b etween them to form a majority, may then
3. The underlying principle of a coalition
be able to agree on a common program~e
system stands on the simple fact of tem that does not require too many drastic comporary
conjunction of specific interest.
promises with their individual policies, and
2
4 . Coalition politics is not a static but a
can proceed to form a government. ,
dynamic affair as coalition players and
Coalition d.e notes a co-operative"arrange. groups dissolve and form new ones.
ment under which distinct political parties,
5.
The keynote of coalition politics is comor at all events members of such parties, unite
.
..
3
promise, and rigid dogma has no place
to form a government or mInistry.
in
it.
Coalition is a direct descendant of the exi6. A coalition government works on the
gencies of mu_lti-party sy~tem i~ a democratic
basis of a minimum programme, which
iGhai, K.K., Indian t;overm~ent and Politics, Eighth
Edition, Kalyani Publishers, Ludhiaha, 2012, p. 508.
4 Sahni , N.C., The theory of coalitions. In Sahni, N.C.

\

.

t

T

i

,

\

1\

i\,

2Robertsori; D., The Penguin Dictionary of Politics,
Penguin Books, London, 1993, p. 73.
J Ogg, F.A., Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, Vo1. 2,
New York, 1957, p. 600.

'

(Ed) Coalition Politics in India, Jullunduf, 1971,

pp.17-18.

5Jo hari,

J.G., Reflections on Indian Politics, New

Delhi, 1974, pp. 3-5.

594 ,(/ Indian Polity
may not be idea l for each partner of the
coa lition.
7. Pragmatism and not ideology is the hall ~
mark of coa li tion po lit ics. In making
poli tica l adju stments, pri nc ipl es may
have to be set asi de.
8. The purpose of.::\ coa liti on adju stment is
to se ize power.
In our co untry, we have see n coa li tions
co min g up eithe r before th e ele ction s or
after the e lectio ns. T he pre-po ll coa li t io n is
cons iderabl y advantageo us becau se it provides a co mm on platform to the parties in
o rder to woo the electorate on the basis of
a joint manifesto. T he post-e lectio n union
is intended to enabl e co n st itu ents to sh are
6
politica l power and run the gove rnm ent .
Table 84.1
51 No

~ FORMATION
In the first four Lok Sabha e lections ( 1952,
1957 , 1962 a n d ]967). the Congress party
sec ured the required majority to form the
governme n t a t the Centre. Eve n though there
was a spli t in th e Co ngress party in 1969, the
minority gove rnme nt of Indira Gandhi managed to co nt inue with the outside SUppOH of
the CPI, the DMK and other parties. Again,
the Congress party wo n the ]971 elect ions and
formed a si ngle-pa rty government.
However, the dominant Congress party was
badly defea ted in the 1977 elections. Since
then, there ha\'e been a number of coa lition
governme n ts at the Centre. Th e details are
mentioned in TJble 84.1.

Formation of Coa lition Governments at the Centre

Period

Coalltton

Prime Minister (Party)

Pnrtners

1.

1977-1979

Janata Party

Morarjl Desai (Congress
(0))

Congress (0), Bharatiya Jana Sangh.
Bharatiya Lok Dal, Socialist Party,
Congress for Democracy, Chandra
Shekhar Group (former congressmen)
and others.

2.

1979-1980

Charan Singh (Janata(5))

Janala (5) and Congress (U). Congress (I)

4.

1990-1991

Janal a Dal (Socialist)
or Samajwadl Janata
Panty

Chandra Shekhar (Janata
Dal (S) or 5amajwadi
Janata Party)

(1) supported from outside.

6.

1997-1998

United Front

I.K. Gujral (Janata Oal)

Janata Dal (S) and Janata Party. Congress

Janata Oal, CPI, TMC, 5P, DMK, AGP, TOP
and others. Congress supported from
outside.

6T he Journal of Parliamentary Information , Scptem b(~r 2000, XLVI(3), p. 394.

Coolition Government

51 N o

,

~ 595

Period

Coalition

Prlm(> Minister (PMty)

PMtners

8.

1999-2004

National Democratic
Alliance (NOA)

A.B. Vajpayee (BJP)

BJP, JO (U). Trinamool Congress. Shiv
Sena, BJD. UP, OMK . PMK, INLO. MDMK.
National Conference, Akali Oal, RLD. AGP
and others.

9.

2004-2009 United Progressive

Manmohan Singh
(Congress)

Congress. NCP. OMf<. RJO. UP, PMK and
others. CPI and CPM supported from

Alliance (UPA)

outside.
10.

2009-2014

United Progressive
Alliance·1I (UPA·II)

Manmohan Singh
(Congress)

11.

2014- 2019

National OemocraUc
Alliance (NOA)

Harend•• Modi (BJp)

Congress. NCP. OMK. Trinamool
Congress, National Conference and
others.

----

,,,

BJP. Uf'. TOP. ShIv sen•. _II Dal.
RashlriVa LoIc Samata Party. Apna DaI (5)
and others. TOP left. NDA In 2018.

12.

2019- till
date

National Democratic
Alliance (NDA)

Narendra Modi (BJP)

t MERITS

1

I~
(

The various advantages or stren gths of the
coa lition gove rnm ents are as follows:
1. There is an accom modation of diverse
interests in the function ing of the government. A coalition governme n t acts
as a channel to meet the expectation s
and redress the grievances of differe nt
groups.
2. Indi a is a hi ghl y di versified co un try.
There are different cultures, languages,
castes, reli gions and ethni c groups, and
all these get represented in the coalition
governments. This mea ns that a coa lit ion government is m ore representative in nature and it better refl ects the
popular opinion of th e electorate. In
oth er words, it represents a much more
broa der spectrum of public opinion
than the sin gle-party gove rnment.
3. A coalition government comprises different political parties having their own
ideologies or agendas. But, the governm ental policy requires the concurren ce
of all the coalition partners. Therefore,
a coalition gove rnment leads to co nsensus-based po litics. In oth er words, there

BJP. Akali Dal, UP. Shiv Sena and others.
Shiv Sena left NOA In 2019 and Akali Dal
in 2020.

is co nse nsual decis io n-making in the
coalition governm ents.
4. Coalition politics stren gthens th e federal
fabric of the Indi an political system.
This is beca use a coalition government
is more se nsitive and responsive to the
regional demands and co n cerns th an
th e single-party government.
5. A coa li t ion government r edu ces the
tyranny of gove rnm ent (despotic rule).
Th is is due to the redu ced domi nation of a single politica l party in the
fun ctioning of'the government. All the
members of the coa li tion partic ipate in
the politica l decision-making. In short,
the decisions m ade a re more balan ced.

t DEMERITS

The various di sadvantages or weaknesses of
the coalition governments are as follows:
1. They are unstable or prone to instability.
The difference of op inion among the
coaliti on partners on policy issues leads
to the collapse of the government.
2. Leadership of the Prime Minister is a
principle of parliam entary form of
government. This principle is curtailed

596

P

Indian Polity

in a coalition government as the Prime
Minister is required to co nsult the coalition partners before taking any major
decision. The critics have ca lled them as
'Super Prim e Ministers' or 'Ultra Prime
Ministers'.
3. The Steering Co mmitt ee or the
Co-ordination Committee of the coalition partners acts as the 'Super-Cabinet',
and thereby it undermines the role and
position of the cabinet in the functioning of the governmental machinery.
4. There is a possib ili ty of the smaller constituents of the coalition government
play ing the role of a 'King-maker'. They
demand more than their stre ngth in the
Parliament.
5. The leaders of regiona l parties bring
in the regio nal factors in the national
decision-making. They pressur ise the

central executive to act on their lines;
otherwise, th ey would threaten to withdraw fTOm the coa lition.
6. The size of the Co uncil of Ministers in
a coalition government is generally
quite large. This is beca use the mini stry ha s to reflect all the co nstitu ents
of the coalition. For example, the A.B.
Vajpayee ministry of 1999 had 70-plus
mini sters and it was ca ll ed as 'Jumbo
Ministry'. This creates the problem
of di stribution of portfolios as well as
the proper co-ordination among the
me mbers.
7. The members of coalition governments do
not assume responsibi lity for the administrative failures a nd lapses. They play
blame games a nd thereby escape from
both co llecti ve responsibility as well as
individual responsib ility.

--

CHAPTER~'

I

85 Anti-Defection Law

he 52nd Amendment Act of 1965 provided for the disqualification of the
members of Parliament and the state
legislatures on th e ground of defection from
one political party to another. For this purpose, it made changes in four Articles l of the
Constitution and added a new Schedule (the
Thnth Schedule) to the Constitution . This act
is often referred to as the 'anti-defection law'.
Later, the 9Ist Amendme n t Act of 2003
made one change in the provisions of the
Thnth Schedule. It omitted an exception provision i.e., disqualification on the ground of
defection not to apply in case of a spJit.

T

'.

t PROVISIONS OF THE ACT
The Tenth Schedule contains the following
provisions with respect to the disqualification of members of Parliament and the state
legislatures on the ground of defection:

IIIDisqualification
Members of Political Parties: A member of
a House belonging to any political party
becomes disqualified for being a member of
the House, (a) if he/sh e voluntarily gives up
his/ her membership of such political party; or
(b) if he/ she votes or abstains from voting in
such House contrary to any-direction issued by
hislher political party without obtaining prior
lThese are Articles 101, 102, 190 a nd 191 which
relate to the vacation of seats and disqualification
from membership of Parliament and the state
legislatures.

permission of such party and such act has not
been condoned by the party within IS days.
FTom the above provision it is clear that
a member elected on a party ticket should
continue in the party and obey the party
directions.
Independent Members: An independent
member of a House (elected without being
set up as a candidate by any political party)
becomes disqualified to remain a member of
the House if he/ she joins any political party
after such election.
Nominated Members: A nominated m ember
of a House becomes disqualified for being
a member of the House if he/she joins any
political party after the expiry of six months
from the date on which hel she takes his/ her
seat in the House. This means that he/ she may
join any political party within six months of
taking his/ her seat in the House without inviting this disqualification.

II IExceptions
The above disqualification on the ground of
defection does not apply in the following
two cases:
(a) If a member goes out ofhislher party as
a result of a merger of the party with
another party. A merger takes place
when two-thirds of the members of the
party have agreed to such merger.
(b) Ifa member, after being elected as the preSiding officer of the House, voluntarily
gives up the membership of his/ her

598 ,(:I Indian Polity
party o r rejo in s it after he / she ceases
to hold that office. This exe mpti on has
been provided in view of the dignity and
impartia li ty of this office.
It must be noted here that the provision
of the 'le nth Sch ed ule pertaining to exemption from disqualification in case of spli t by
one~ third members of the leg islature party
has been deleted by the 9lst Amen dm en t Act
of 2003. It means that the defectors have no
more protection on gro unds of splits.

g I Deciding Authority
Any question regarding d isqualifi cation arising out of defect io n is to be decided by the
presiding officer of t he House. Under the act,
there is no time-Jimit fo r him / h er to decide
such a case. Ori gi n a lly, the act provided
that t he decision of the presiding office r is
final a nd ca nn ot be questioned i n any co urt.
z
However, in KilzofO Hallohan case ( 1992),
t he Supre me Co urt declared th is provision as
u n co nsti tuti ona l on th e ground that it seeks
to take away the jurisdiction of the Sup re me
Court and the high courts. It he ld that the
presiding officer, while deciding a question
unde r the 'lenth Schedule, function as a tribu~
nal. Hence, his/ h er decision like that of a ny
oth er tribunal, is subj ect to judicia l review
on the groun ds of mala fides, perversity, etc.
But, the court rejected the contentio n that the
vest ing of adj udi catory powers in the presid~
ing officer is by itself invalid on the ground
of political bias3 .

D IRule-Making Power
The presiding officer of a House is e mpowered
to make rules to give effect to t he provisions
2KillOto Hollohan vs. ZoclliWw ( 1992).

J..rhe coun observed: 'TheChainnan or Speakers hold
a pivotal position in the scheme of parliamentary
democracy and are guardia ns of (he righls and
privileges of the I·louse. They are expected to and
do take far-reaching decisions in the functioning
of parliamentary democracy. Vestiture of power
to adjudica te questions under the Th nth Schedule
in such constitutional functionaries should not be
considered unexceptionable'.

of the Thnth Sched ul e. All such rules mu st
be placed before the Hou se for 30 days. T he
House may approve or modify or di sa pprove
t hem . Furt her, he/she m ay direct that any
willful contravention by an y member of such
rules m ay be dea lt with in the same m a nn e r
as a breach of privilege of t he Ho use.
According to the rules made so, the presiding
officer ca n take up a defection case on ly when
he/she receives a comp laint from a member
of the House. Before ta king the final decision,
he/she must give the member (agai nst whom
the com pl a int h as been made) a ch a n ce
to s ubmit his/ her exp lanat ion . H e /s h e
may also refer the matter to the co mmi ttee
of pr ivileges for inquiry. Hence, defection has
n o imm ed iate a nd a utom atic effect.

~ EVALUATION OF THE ACT
Th e Tenth Schedu le of the Co n s titu t io n
(whic h embodies the anti-defection law) is
designed to prevent the ev il or' mi sch ief of
politi ca l defections mot ivated by the lure of
office or material benefits or oth e r s imilar
conside ratio n s. It is intended to strengthen
the fabri c of Indi a n parliamentary democracy
by curbing unprincipled a nd unethical politi.
ca l defections. Rajiv Ga ndhi , the the n Prime
Mini ster, described it as the 'first step towards
cleaning-up publi c life'. T he then Central law
mini ster stated that t he passing of th e 52nd
Ame ndm e nt Bill (anti-defection bill ) by a
unanimous vote by both the I-louses of Parliament was 'a p roof, if any, of the maturity and
stability of Indi a n democ racy'.

Advantages
The following can be cited as the adva ntages
of t he anti-defection law:
(a) It provides for greater stabil ity in the
body politic by ch ecki ng the prope nsity
of legislators_to cha n ge parties.
(b) It facilitates de mo crat ic rea lignment
of panies in the legislature by way of
merger of parties.
(e) It reduces corruption at the polit ica l level
as well as no n-develop me ntal expenditure incurred on irregular electio n s.

Anti-Defection Low

(d) It gives, for the first time, a clear-cut constitutional recognition to the existen ce
of politi cal parties.

Criticism
Though the anti-defection law been hailed as
a bold step towards cleansing our potiticallife
and started as new epoch in the political life
of the country, it has revealed may lacunae
in its operation and failed to prevent defections in toto, It came to be criticised on the
following grounds:
1. It does not make a differentiation between
dissent and defection , It curbs the legislator'S right to dissent and freedom of
conscience, Thus, 'i t clearly puts party
bossism on a pedestal and sanctions
tyranny of the party in the name of the
party disciplin e,4,
2. Its distinction between individual defection and group defection is irrational.
In other words, 'it banned only retail
d efect io n s and legal is ed wholesale
defections'S,
3. It does not provide for the expulsion of a
legislator from his/ her party for his/h er
activities outside the legislature.
4. Its discrimination between an indepe ndent me mber a nd a nominated member
is illogical. If the former joins a party,
he/she is disqualified while the latter is
allowed to do the same.
5. Its vesting of decision-making authority
in the presiding officer is criticised on two
grounds, Firstly, he/she may not exercise
this authority in an impartial and objective manner due to politica l exigencies.
Secondly. he/ she lacks the legal knowledge and experience to adjudicate upon
the cases. In fact, two Speakers of the
Lok Sabha (Rabi Ray-1991 and Shivraj
Patil-1993) have themselves expressed
4 Soli J . Sorabjee, 'The Remedy should not be worse

than the Disease', TheTimesof1ndi(J. (Sund(J.Y Review),
February 1, 1985, p. 1.
5 Madhl,1, Limaye, Contt:mp.qrfJry Indi(J.n Politics, 1989,
p.190.

21 599

doubts on their su itability to adjudicate
upon the cases related to defections6.

~ 91 sT AMENDMENT ACT (2003)
Reasons
While introducing this amendment biB in
the Parliament, the Government of India gave
the following reasons for making this amendment to the Constitution of India:
1. Demands have been made from time to
time in certain quarters for strengthening and amending the Anti-defection
Law as contained in the Thnth Schedule,
on the ground that these provisions have
not been able to achieve the desi red
goal of checking defections. The Thnth
Schedule has also been criticised on the
ground that it allows bulk defe ct~o n s
while declaring individual defectIons
as illegal. The provision for exemption
from disqua lification in case of splits as
provided in the Thnth Schedule has, in
particular, come under severe criticism
on account of its destabiHsing effect on
the Government.
2. The Committee on Electoral Reforms
( Oinesh Goswami Committee) in its
report of 1990, the Law Commi ssio n of
India in its 170th Report on ~Reform of
Electoral Laws" (1999) a nd the National
Commission to Review the Working of
the Con stitution (NCRWC) in its report
of 2002 have, inter alia, recomme nded
omission of the provision of the Tenth
Sch edule pertaining to exemption from
disqualification in case of splits.
3. The NCRWC was also of the view that a
defector should be penalised for his/ her
action by debarring him / he r from ho1ding any public office as a minister or any
Shivraj Pa tH stated: 'The advantages in
givi ng these cases to the judicia ry are many, The
Spea ke r or the Chairman mayor may not be
endowed with lega l acumen and proficiency in
law. It is more apt tQ have the cases decided by the
Supre me Court or high court judges',

6Speaker

.

600

fJ

Indian Polity

other remunerative poli tica l post fo r a t
least the duration of the remai ning term
of the existing Legislature or until, the
next fresh e lections whichever is earlier.
4. The NCRWC h as also observed that
a bnormall y large Co uncil s of Ministers
were b ei n g co n st itut ed by var io u s
Governments at Ce ntre and States a nd
this practice had to be prohibited by
la w a nd that a ce iling on the numbe r
of mini sters in a state or the Union
Government be fixed at the maximum of
10% of the tota l stre ngt h of the popula r
House of the Legislature.

Provisions
The gist Amendment Act of 2003 ha s made
the following provi sions to limit t he size of
Co un cil of Ministers, to de bar defectors from
holding pub lic offices, and to st re ngthe n the
a nt i·defection law:
1. The total number of ministers, including th e Prim e Minister, in the Centra l
Cou nc il of Ministers sha ll not exceed
IS per ce nt of the total stre ngth of the
Lok Sab ha.
2. A member of eithe r House of Parliament
belonging to any political party who is
di squalifi ed o n the ground of defection
shall a lso be di squa lified to be appo inted
as a ministe r.
3 . The tota l number of mi ni sters, including the Chi ef Minister, in the Cou nc il
of Mini sters in a state shall not exceed
15 per ce n t of the total stre ngth of the

Leg islative Assembly of that state. But,
the numbe r of m ini sters, including the
Chief Mini ster, in a state sha ll not be
less than 12.
4. A member of e ithe r House of a state
leg islature belonging to a ny po l iti ca l
party who is di sq ualifi ed o n the grou nd
of defection shall a lso be disqualified to
be a ppointed as a mini ster.
5. A member of either Hou se of Parlia ment
o r e ither House o f a State Legisla ture
be longin g to any pol iti ca l party who
is disqualified on the ground of defection sha ll a lso be di sq ua lified to hold
any remu n erative politi ca l po st. The
ex pressio n "rem un e rat ive politica l post"
mea n s ( i) a ny office under th e Cent ral
Gove rnm e n t or a sta te gove rnm e nt
whe re t he sa lary or rem un e ration fo r
suc h office is paid out of th e public
revenue of the co n cerned government;
or (ii) a ny office under a body, whether
incorporated or not, which is wholly
or partia ll y owned by t he Cent ral
Govern me nt o r a state govern ment a nd
the sa la ry or re muneration for suc h
office is paid by such body, except where
s uch sala ry o r remuneration paid is
co mpe nsa tory in nature.
6. The provision of the lenth Schedu le (a ntidefection law) perta ining to exemption
from di squalificati o n in case of split by
one-thi rd members of legisla ture pa rty
has bee n de leted. It m ea n s th at the
defe ctors ha ve no more protectio n on
grounds of spl its.



.86

CHAPTER;'

~ MEA NING AND TECH NIQU ES
The term 'press ure group ' was origin ated in
the USA. A pressu re group is a group of people who are organ ised active ly for promo ting
and defen ding their comm on interests. It is
so cal1ed as it attem pts to bring a chang e in
the public policy by exerti ng pressu re on the
gover nmen t. It acts as a liaiso n betwe en the
gover nmen t and its memb ers.
The pressu re group s are also called interest
groups or vested group s. They are differ ent
from the politic al partie s in that they neithe r
conte st electi ons nor try to captu re politi cal
power. They are co nce rned with specif ic programm es and issues and their activi ties are
confin ed to the protec tion and promo tion of
the intere sts of their memb ers by influe ncing
the gover nmen t.
The pressu re group s influe nce the policy makin g and policy -imple menta tion in the
gover nmen t throu gh legal and legiti mate
metho ds like lobby ing, corres ponde nce, publicity, propa gandi sing, petiti oning , public
debat ing, maint aining conta cts with their
legisla tors and so forth. Howeve r, some times
they resort to illegit imate and illegal metho ds
like strike s, violen t activi ties and corru ption
which damag es public intere st and admin istrative integr ity. .
Accor ding to Odega rd, pressu re group s
resort to three differ ent techn iques in securing their purpo ses. First, they can try to place
in public office perso ns who are favou rably
dispos ed towar ds the intere sts they seek to
promo te. This techn ique may be labell ed

Pressure Groups

electioneering. Secon d, they can try to persuade public office rs, wheth er they are initially favou rably dispo sed towar d them or
not, to adopt and enforc e the polici es that
th ey think wi1l prove most benef icial to their
intere sts. This techn ique may rbe labell ed
lobbying. Third , they can try to influe nce
public opinio n and thereb y gain an indire ct
influe nce over the gover nmen t, since the
gover nmen t in a demo cracy is substa ntially
affect ed by public opinio n. This techn iqu e
may be labell ed propagandizingl.

~ PRESSURE GROUPS IN INDIA
A large numb er of pressu re group s exist in
India. But, they are not develo ped to the same
exten t as in the US or the weste rn count ries
like Britai n, France, Germ any arid so on. The
pressu re group s in India ca n be broad ly classified into the follow ing catego ries:

II IBusiness Groups
Th e busi ness group s includ e a large numb er
of indus trial and comm ercial bodie s. They
are the most sophis ticate d, the most powerful and the larges t of all pressu re group s in
India. They includ e:
(i) Feder ation of India n Cham ber of
Comm erce and Indus try (FICCI).
(ii) Assoc iated Cham ber of Comm erce and
Indus try of India (ASSOCHAM).
.

.

IG .A. Almon d and G.B. Colem a n (cds), The Politics
of the Developing Areas, Prince ton, (1970), p. 185.

602 ~ Indian Pality
(iii) Federation of All India Foodgrain Dealers
Association (FAIFDA).
(iv) All -Indi a Manufacturers Orga nisat io n
(A IMO).

fl iTrade Unions
The trade union s voice the dema nds of the
industrial workers. They are also known as
labo ur groups. A pecul iar feature of trade
unions in Indi a is that t hey are .assoc iated
e ith er directl y or indirect ly with diffe rent
politica l part ies. They include:
(i) All-India Trade Un ion Co n gress
(AITUC)-affil iated to CPI
( ii) Indian Na tion a l Trade Unio n Congress
( INTUC) -affil iated to the Co ngress
( ii i) Hind Mazdoor Sa bha (HM S) -affiliated
to the Socia1ists
(iv) Centre of Indian nade Union s (C ITU )affilia ted to the CPM
(v) Bharati ya Mazdoor Sa ngh ( BM S) affiliated to t he BJP
Fi rst Trade Un ion in India: All I ndia Trade
Union Congress (A ITUC) was founded in 1920
with La la Lajpat Rai as its first Preside nt.
Up to 1945, Congress me n, Socia li sts and Co mmuni sts worked in the AITUC which was the
ce ntral trade union o rganisa tion of worke rs
of India. Subsequ entl y, the trade un ion moveme nt got split on politi ca l lines.

II IAgrarian Groups
The agrarian groups represent the farme rs and
the agricultural labour class. They inc1ude:
(i) Bhartiya Kisan Union (i n the wheat belt
of No rth India)
(ii) All India Kisan Sabha (the oldest a nd the
largest agrarian group)
(iii) Bhartiya Kisan Sa ngh (Gujarat)
( iv) Shetkhari Sanghatana (Ma harashtra )
(v) All-India Kisan Sammelan
(vi) United Kisan Sabha (co ntrolled by the
CPM)

El lProfessional Associations
These are associations that ra ise the con cerns
a nd dem a nds of doctors, lawye rs, j ournali sts

and teachers. Despite va ri ous restrictions,
these assoc iation s pressurise the gove rnme nt
by va rious methods including agitation s for
the improve ment of their service co nd ition s.
They include:
(i) Indian Medical Association ( IMA)
(ii) Bar Counc il of India (BC I)
( ii i) Indian Federation of Working Journalists
(IFWJ)
(iv) All India Federation of Universi ty and
Co ll ege Teac he rs (A IFUCT)

El lStudent Organisations
Vari ous unions have bee n formed to represe nt the stude nt co mmunity. However, th ese
union s, like the trade union s, are a lso affiliated to va r ious politi ca l parti es. T hese are:
( i) Akhil Bharati ya Vidyarthi Pa ri sha d
(ABVP) (affiliated to BJP)
(li) All India Students Federation (AI SF)
(affiliated to CPI)
(iii) Nationa l Students Un ion of India (NSUI)
(affi liated to Congress)
(iv) Student s Federation of India (SFI)
(affilia ted to CPM)

El lReligious Organisations
The orga ni sa tion s ba sed on re ligion ha ve
co me to play a n importan t role in Indi an
politics. They rep resent the n arrow com muna l interest. They include:
(i) Rashtriya Swaya mseva k Sa ngh (RSS)
(ii) Vishwa Hindu Parishad (V HP)
(ii i) Jamaat-e- Isla mi
( iv) All-India Conference ofindian Christians
( v) Shiroman i Aka li Dal
~The Shiromani Akali Dal sh o uld be
regarded as more of a religious pressure group
rather than a political party in view of the
fact that it has bee n co n cerned more with
the mi ssion of saving the sikh community
from being absorbed into th e ocean of hindu
soc iety than with fighting for the ca use of a
sikh home land" .

,

2J.C. Johari: Iu dian Govemment and Politics, Vishal ,
Thirteenth Edition , p. 591.

Pressure Groups

IIICaste Groups
Like religion, caste has been an important fa ctor in Indi an politi cs. The competitive politics
in many states of the Indian Union is in fact
the politics of caste rivalries: Brahmin versus
Non-Bra hmin in Thmil Nadu and Maharashtra,
Rajput versus Jat in Rajasthan, Kamma versus
Reddy in Andhra, Ahir versus Jat in Haryana,
Baniya Brahmin versus Patidar in Gujarat,
Kayastha versus Rajput in Bihar, Nair ve rsus
Ezhava in Kera la and Lingayat versus Okkaliga in Karn ataka 3 . Some of the caste-based
organisations a re:
(i) Nadar Caste Association in Thmil Nadu
(ii) Marwari Association
(iii) Harijan Seva k Sa ngh
(iv) Kshatri ya Maha Sabha
(v) Kayastha Sabh a

.- El lTribal Organisations
Th e tribal orga ni satio n s are active in MP,
Chattisga rh, Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal
and .th e North Eastern Sta tes of Assam ,
Mampur, Naga land and so on. Their demands
range from reform s to that of secession from
India and so me of them are involved in
insurgen cy activiti es. Th e tribal organisations
include:
( i) National Socialist Council of Naga land
.

,,

1)
.,

(NSCN)

( ii) Tribal Na tional Voluntee rs (TNV) in
Tripura
(iii) People's Libe ration Army in Manipur
(iv) Tribal Sa ngh of Assa m
(v) United Mi zo Freedom Organisation

aI

Linguistic Groups

Language has bee n so important fa ctor in
Indian politics that it became the main basis
for the reorganisation of states. The language
along with caste, religion and tribe have been
responsible for the emergence of political
India since Independence
(in Social and Economic Development in In dia by
Basu and Sission , p. 110).

~ 603

parties as well as pressure groups. Some of the
linguistic groups are:
(i) Thm il Sa nga m
(ii) Anjuman Tarraki-i-Urdu
(iii) Andhra Maha Sabha
(iv) Hindi Sahitya Sa mm elan
(v) Naga ri Prachara ni Sabha
(vi) Dakshin a Bha rat Hindi Prachar Sabha

IriI l ldeology Based Groups
In more rece nt times, the pressure groups are
form ed to pursue a particular ideology, i. e.,
a ca use, a prin ciple or a programme. These
groups incl ude:
(i) Environmental protection groups like
Narmada Bachao Andolan, and Chipko
Movement
(ii) Democratic rights organisations
(iii) Civ il libert ies associations
(iv) Gandhi Peace Foundation
(v) Woman rights organisations

01 1Anomie Groups
Almond a nd Powell observed: "By anomie
pressure groups we mean more or less a
spontaneous breakthrough into the pol it ica l syste m from th e society such as riots,
d e mon stration s, assassinations and th e
like. The Indian Government and bureaucrati c elite, overwhelm ed by the problem
of eco n o mi c development and scarcity
of re.sources available to them, inevitabl y
acquires a technocratic and anti-political
frame of mind , particularistic demands of
whatever kinds are deni ed legitimacy. As a
consequ en ce interest groups a re alienated
from the politica l system ,,4. Some of the
a nomi e pressure groups are:
(i) Naxa lite Groups
.
(ii) Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front
(JKLF)
( iii) United Liberation Front of Assam (VLFA)
(iv) Dal Khalsa

3Pau l Kolenda: Caste in

4 G.A. Almond and G.B. Powell: Comparative Politics,

1972, pp. 75-76.

-

CHAPTER

87 National Integration

ndia is a la nd of widespread di versities
in terms of religion , language, caste,
tribe, race, region and so on . I-Ien ce, th e
achievement of national integration becomes
very essential for the all-around development
and prosperity of the country.

I

t MEANING
Definitions and statements on national
integration:
"National integration implies avoidance of
divisive movements that would bal kanise the
nation and presen ce of attitudes throughout
the society that give preferen ce to national
and public interest as di sti nct from parochial
interests"] Myron Weiner.
UNational integration is a soci o-psychological and educational process through which
a fee ling of unity, solidarity and cohesion
develops in the hearts of the people and a
se nse of common citizenship or feeling of
loya lty to the nation is fostered among them N2
HA Gani.
"Nationa l integration is not a house which
could be built by mortar and bricks. It is
n ot an industrial p lan too which cou ld be
discussed and implemented by experts. In tegration, on the contrary, is a thought which
must go into the heads of the people. It is the
consciousness which must awaken the people
at large" Dr. S. Radhakrishna.

Myron Weiner: Politics of Scarcity: Public Pressure
and Political Response in India, 1963.
2 H .A . Gani: Muslim Political Issues and Nationa l
Integration , p. 3.
l

"National in tegrations means, a n d ought
to mean , cohesion not fusion, unity but
not uniformity, reconc il iation but not
merger, agglomeration but not assim ilation
of the dis cr ete segments of the people
constituting a political community or state")
Rasheeduddin Klwll.
1b sumup, the concept of nationa l integration involves politica l, econom ic, social,
cultural and psychologi ca l dimensions and
the inter-relations between them.

t OBSTACLES

Among the major obstacles to nation al integration include:

II IRegionalism
Regiona lism refers to sub-nationalism and
sub-territoria l loyalty. It implies the love for
a particular region or state in preference to
the country as a whole. There is also subregionali sm, that is, love for a particular
region in preference to the state of which the
regio n forms a part.
Regionalism is "a subsidiary process of
political in tegration in India. It is a manifestation of those resid ual elements which
do not find expression in the national polity and national culture, and being excluded
from th e centrality of the new polity, express
3 Ras heeduddin

Khan: National Integration and
Communal Harmony (in National In tegration of
India, Volume II , Edited by Si nha) .

National Integration

"

;
I

\,

themselves in po1itica l disco ntent and politica l exc1usio ni s m~4.
.
Regionalism is a country-wide phenomenon
which manifests itself in the following forms:
(i) Demand of the people of certain states for
secession from the Indian Uni on (like
Kha li sta n, Dravid Nad, Mizos, Nagas and
so on),
(H) Demand of the peopl e of certai n a reas
for separate statehood (like Bodoland,
Vidharbha, Gorkhaland a nd so on).
(iii) Demand of people of ce rtain Union
Territories for fuB-fledged state hood
(like Puducherry, Delhi an d so o n).
(iv) Inte r-sta te boundary di sp ut es (like
Ch a ndiga rh and Bc lgaurn) a nd riverwater disputes (like Ca uve ry, Krishna,
Ravi-Bcas and so on).
(v) 'Sons of the soil theo ry' whi ch advocates preference to loca l peop le in
government jobs, private jobs, p e r·
mits a nd so on. Th e ir slogan wiJI be
Assam for Assamese, Maharashtra for
Ma ha ra shtrian s and so o n .

II ICommunalism

\

Com munali sm mea ns love for one's religious
co mmunity in prefe re nce to the nation and a
tende n cy to promote the communa l interest
at the cost of the interest of other religious
com munities. It has its roots in th e British
rule where the 1909, 1919 and 1935 Acts had
introduced co mmun al representation for the
Muslims, Sikhs and others.
The co mmunalism got accentuated with
th e poiiticisatiol1 of religion. Its various
m a nifestations are:
(i) For matio n of political pa rties based on
religion (like Akali Dal, Muslim League,
Shiv Se na a nd so on).
(ii) Emergen ce of pressure groups (non·polit·
ical e ntities) ba sed on religion (1ike
RSS, Vishwa Hindu Pa ri sh ad, Jamaat·eIslami a nd so on ).
4Kousa r J . Azam: Political Aspects of Nationa l lntcgration, p. 82.

~ 605

(iii) Co mmunal riots (between Hindus and
Muslims, Hindu s and Sikhs, Hindu s
and Chri stians a nd so on- Varanasi,
Mathura, Hyderabad, Aligarh , Amritsar
and some othe r pla ces are affected by
co mmuna l violence).
(iv) Dispute over religious structu res like temples, mosques and oth ers (The dispute
over Ram Janma Bhoomi in Ayodhya
where the kar sevaks had demolished a
disputed structure on December 6, 1992).
The reasons for the persistence of commu·
nalism include re ligious orthodoxy of muslim s, the role of Pakistan, Hindu chauvinism ,
government's in ertia, the role of politica l parties and other groups, electora l compulsions,
communa l media, socio-economic factors and
so on.

g ICasteism
Caste ism impli es love for on~'s own castegroup in prefere n ce to th e general national
in te rest. It is mainly an outcom e of th e
politicisat ion of caste. Its va rious manifestations include:
(i) Formation of political parties on the basis
of caste (like Justice Party in Madras,
Republican Pa rty, Bahujan Samaj Party
and so on).
(ii) Emergence of pressure groups ( non.
politica l e ntities) based on caste (like
Nada r Assoc ia tion, Harijall Sevak Sangh,
Kshatriya Mahasabha a nd so on).
(iii) Allotment of party tickets during e lec·
tions and th e formation of coun cil of
mini sters in th e states on caste lines.
(iv) Caste conflicts between highe r and lower
castes or betwee n dominant castes in
various states like Bihar, Uttar Pradesh,
Madhya Pradesh and so on.
(v) Violent disputes and agita tions over the
rese rvation policy.
B.K. Nehru observed: "The communal electorates (o f the British days) in a vestigal form
st ill re ma in in the sha pe of reservati ons for
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
They serve to e mpha sise caste origin and

606

P

Ind;an Pal;,y

m'lke peo ple co nscious of the caste in whi ch
th ey were bor n. This is n ot co nducive to
natio nal intcgrat io n"S,
At the slate leve l, th e politics is basica ll y
a fig ht betwee n the major caste groups li ke
Kamma ve rsus Reddy in Andhra Prades h,
Lin gayat vers u s Voka li gga in Karn a ta ka,
Nayar ve rsus Ez hava i n Ke ra la , Ba n ia versus
Pati da r in Guj a ra t, Bhum iar versus Raj put in
Bi har, J a t ve rsus Ahir in I-Ia rya n a, Jat ve rsus
RajplIt in Uttar Pradesh , Ka lita ve rsus Aha m
in Assam a nd so on .

9 1Linguism
Lin gu ism mea n s love for on e's la nguage and
la nguage-speakin g peo pl e. Th e phe nom e na
of Jin guism , like th a t of reg io na li sm , C0 111mun alism o r caste islli , is also a co n seque nce
o f poli tica l process. It has two dime ns io ns:
(a) th e reorga ni s<lt ion of states on th e bas is
of language; a nd (b) the dete rmi na tio n of the
offici al la nguage of th e Uni o n.
Th e crea ti on of the first linguisti c state of
Andhra out of the then Madras state in 1953
led to the coun try wide dema nd for the reorga ni sati on of states on th e basis of langu<lge.
Co n sequen tl y, the states were reo rga ni sed on
a la rge-sca le in 1956 o n th e basis of the recomm endat io ns made by th e States Reorga nisa tion Comm iss io n 6 (1 953- 1955). Eve n after
t hi ~, the polit ica l ma p of Ind ia underwent
a co ntinuous ch a nge du e to the pressure of
popular agitati on s and th e politi ca l co nditions, whi ch resulted in the bifurcation of
existing states like Bombay, Punj ab, Assa m,
a nd so on.
The enactment of the Officia l La nguages Act
( 1963) m aking Hindi as the Offi cia l Language
of the Union led to the ri sc of a nti-Hindi agitati on in South India and West Bengal. Th en,
5B. K. Nehru : T he Ind ira Ga n dh i Mem oria l Lectu res
deli vered at the University or Kcra la in January,
1988.
SIt was a lh ree-member com m iS5 io n headed by Fazl
Ali. Us other two mc mbe rs WC TC K.M. Panikknr
and H.N. KUllzru.

th e Cen tra l gove rnmen t assured that English
would co nti nue as an 'associa te' official language so long as the n on -Hindi speaki ng sta tes
des ire it. Moreover, the t.hree-Ianguage fo rm ula
(E nglish, Hindi and a regi onal la nguage) for
school system is sti.ll not bein g implem ented
in Th mil Nadu i . Co nsequently, Hi ndi could not
emerge as the lingua franca of the co mposite
cultu re of India as desi red by th e fra mers of
the Con stitutio n.
The proble m of lin gui s lll got acce ntu ated
with th e rise of some reg ional pa rties like the
TOP, AG P, Shi v Se na a nd so o n .

1

NATIONAL INTEGRATION
COUNCIL

In 1961, th e ce ntral gove rnm en t co nve ned
th e Na ti o na l Integra t io n Co nfe rence to find
ways a nd mea n s to combat th e ev ils o r commu na lis m , casteism , reg io na lism, lin gu ism
a nd na rrow- mind edn ess a n d to fo rmul a te
definite co nclu sio ns in orde r to give a lea d
to the co untry. This co n fere nce decided to
set-up a Natio nal In tegrat io n Co unci l (N IC)
to review all matters pertai nin g to nationa l
in teg ratio n a nd to make reco mm endation s
thereon . Acco rdingly, th e NIC was con stituted
in ]96] a nd held its first meeting in 1962.
Th e NIC consists of Prime Ministe r as
Chairm an , Unio n Ministers, Leaders of the
Oppositi on in the Lok Sabha and th e Raj ya
Sabha, th e Ch ief Ministe rs of a ll states a nd
uni on terri to ri es with Leg islatures. It a lso
includes lea ders of na tion al and regi onal
polit ical parties, chairpe rso ns of nati o na l
co mmissio n s, e m in e nt j o urn a lists, public
fi gures, and re prese ntatives of business an d
wome n's orga nisation s.
The meetings of the N I C a re con ve n ed as
per requirement from tim e to tim e. There
is no r egul a r or sp ec ifi ed tim e inte rval
for convening meeting of the NIC. So fa r,
Nadu Govern men t opposed the tlm~c
fo rmula a nd co ntin ued to teach only
two la n guages, t hat is, Engli sh a nd Thmil in lhe
educa ti onal insti tu tions oflhc state.

7Th mil

I ~tn gu age

)

Notional Integration

16 meetings of the NIC have been held since
its inception.
The 16th meeting of the NIC was held on
23·09·2013. A Resolution was passed in the
meeting to condemn violence, take all measures to strengthen harmonious relationship
between all communities, to resolve differences and disputes among the people within
the framework of law, to condemn atrocities
on Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes,
to condemn sexual abuse and ensure that all
women enjoy the fruits of freedom to pursue
their socia l and economic development with
equal opportunities, and to safeguard their
right of movement in the public space at any
time of the day or night.

NATIONAL FOUNDATION FOR
COMMUNAL HARMONY
The National Foundation for Communal
Harmony (NFCH) was set up in 1992. It is
an autonomous body under the administrative control of the Union Horne Ministry. It
promotes communal harmony, fraternity and
national integration.

~ 607

The activities undertaken by the NFCH are
mentioned below: 8
1. 1b provide financial assistance to the
child victims of societal violence for
their care, education and training,
aimed at their effective rehabilitation
2. Th promote communal harmony and
national integration by organising vari- ·
ety of activities either independently or
in association with educational institutions, NGOs & other organisations
3. 1b conduct studies and grant scholarships
to institutions/scholars for conducting
studies
4. 1b confer awards for outstanding contribution to communal harmony and
national integration
5. 1b involve Central/state governments JUT
Adm inistrations, i ndustrial/ commercial
organisations, NGOs and others in promoting the objectives of the Foundation
6. 1b provide information services, publish
monographs and books, etc. on the subject
s-rhis infonnation is obtained from the official
website of the National Foundation for Communal
Harmony, Government of India.

CHAPTER

88

he foreign policy of India regulates
India's relations with other states of
the world in promoting its nationa l
interests. It is determined by a number of
factoTS, viz., geography, history and tradition,
social structure, political organisation, inter·
national milieu 1, economic position, military
strength, public opinion and leadership.

T

t PRINCIPLES
The various principles (or features) of Indian
foreign policy are explained below:

D I Promotion of World Peace
India's foreign policy aims at the promotion of
international peace and security. Article 5] of
the Constitution (Directive Principles of State
Policy) directs the Indian State to promote
internationa l peace and security, maintain
just and honourable relations between nations,
foster respect for international law and treaty
obligations, and encourage settlement of international disputes by arbitration. Besides peace
is necessary to promote the economic development of nations.

!I IAnti-Colonialism
The foreign policy of India opposes colonialism and imperialism. India views that the
colonialism and imperialism leads to exploitation of the weaker nations by the imperial ist
lIt includes world politica l climate, world public
opinion and world organisations.

Foreign Policy

powers and affects th e promotion of international peace. India advocated the liquidation
of colonialism in all forms and supported the
l iberation movement in Afro-Asian countries
like Indonesia, Malaya, Thn isia, Algeria, Ghana,
Namibia and so on. Thus, India expressed her
solidarity with the people of Afro-Asian nations
in their struggle against colonia l and imperialist forces like Britain, France, Holland, Portugal
and so on. The present neo-colonialism and
nco-imperialism is also opposed by India.

II IAnti-Racialism
Opposition to racialism in a ll its forms is an
important aspect of Indian foreign policy.
According to India, racialism (i.e., discrimination between people on the basis of race),
like colonialism and imperia lism, leads to
exploitation of the blacks by the whites,
socia l inequity and hinders the promotion
of world peace. India strongly criticised the
policy of apartheid (racial discrimination)
being followed by the white minority racist
regime of South Africa. It even snapped diplomatic relations with South Africa in 1954
as a protest against the policy of apartheid 2 •
Similarly, India played an important role in
the liberation of Zimbabwe (earlier Rhodesia)
a n d Namibia from the white domination.
2India again re-established fu ll diplomatic relations
with South Africa in 1994 when the policy of
racial discrimination was finally given up and
democratic government under Nelson Mandela
came into existence.

Foreign Policy

D INon-Alignment
When India became independent in 1947, the
world was divided into two blocs on ideologi.
cal basis, namely, the capitalist bloc headed by
USA and the communist bloc headed by the
fonner USSR. In such a situation of 'cold war',
India refused to join any of these two blocs
and adopted a policy of non-alignment. In
this context, Jawaharlal Nehru observed: "We
propose to keep away from the power politics
of groups, aligned against one another, which
have led in the past to world wars and which
may again lead to disasters on an even vaster
scale. I feel that India can playa big part, and
perhaps an effective part, in helping to avoid
war. Therefore, it becomes all the more necc&sary that India should not be lined up with any
group of power which for various reasons are
full of fear of war and prepare for war".
~ When we say that India follows a policy
of non-alignment, it means (i) that India has
no military alliances with countries of either
bloc or indeed with any nation; (ii) India has
an independent approach to foreign policy;
and (iii) India attempts to maintain friend ly
relations with all countries"J.

~ 609

non-alignment are the greatest contributions
of India to the theory and practice of international relations.

rl iAfro-Asian ~i,as
Even though the foreign policy ofIndia stands
for maintaining friend ly relations with all the
countries of the world, it has always exhibited
a special bias towards the AfrO-Asian nations.
It aims at promoting unity among them and
tries to secure for them a voice an d an influence in the international bodies. India has
been seeking international assistance for the
economic development of these countries. In
1947, India called the first Asian Relations
Conference in New Delhi. In 1949, India
brought together the Asian countries on
the burning issue of Indonesian freedom.
India played an active role in the AfrO-Asian
Conference at Bandung (Indonesia) in 1955.
India also played an important role in the
formation of Group of 77 (1964), Group of
15 (1990), Indian Ocean Rim Association
(1997), BIMSTEC (1997), and SAARC (1985).
India earned the name of 'Big Brother' from
many of the neighbouring countries.

El lPanchsheel

fl i Links with Commonwealth

Panchsheel implies the five principles of
conduct in international relations. It was
embodied in the Preamble of the Indo-China
Treaty on Tibet, signed in 1954 by Jawaharlal
Nehru and Chou-En-Lai, the Chinese Premier.
The five principles were:
(i) mutual respect for each other's territorial
integrity and sovereignty;
(ii) non-aggression;
(i ii) non-interference in each other's internal
affairs;
(iv) equality and mutual benefit; and
(v) peaceful co-existence.
Panchsheel became very popular and many
countries of the world like Burma, Yugoslavia,
Indonesia and so on adopted it. Panchsheel and

In 1949 itself, India decla red the continuation
of her full membership of the Commonwealth
of the Nations and the acceptance of the British
Crown as the head of the Commonwealth. But,
this extra-constitution al declaration does not
affect India's sovereignty in any manner as
the Commonwealth is a voluntary association
......
of independent nations. It also does not affect
India's republican character as India neither
pays final allegiance to the British Crown nor
the latter has any functions to discharge in
relation to India.
India remained a member of the Commonwealth because of pragmatic reasons. It
thought that the membersh ip in the Commonwea lth wou ld be beneficial to her in
the economic, political, cultural and other
spheres. It has been playing an important
role at the CHOGM (Commonwealth Heads

3A.S. Narang: Indian Governmenrand Politics, Gitanjali,
2000 Edition, p. 602.

610 ,r ) Indian Polity
of Government Meet in g), a lso known as the
Com monwealth Summi t. In dia hosted the
CHOGM at New De lhi in 1983.

III ISupport to the UNO
India beca m e a m e mber of the UNO i n 1945
itse lf. Si nce then, it has bee n su pporting t he
ac tiviti es and programm es of UNO. It h as
expressed fu ll fa ith in the objectives and prin·
ciples of UNO. Some of t he facets of I ndia's
role in UNO a re:
( i) It is through the UNO that India embarked
on the poli cy of fighting against the colo·
nia lism, impe rialism a nd racia li sm , a nd
now neo-colonia1ism, nco-imperialism
and terrori sm .
( ii) In ] 953, Vij ay Lakshmi Pandit of Indi a
was e lected as the President of th e UN
General Assembly.
(iii ) Ind ia actively participated in the UN
Peace-keepi ng mission s in Korea, Co ngo,
EI Sa lvador, Com bodia , Angola, Soma li a,
MOl.a mbique, Sie rra Leone, Yugoslavia
and so on .
(iv) India co ntinued to participate actively in
the ope n e nded wo r ki ng grou ps of the
UNO. In dia was the Co-c hairman of
the working group on the stre ngthe ning
of the UN whi ch s ub mitted its report
in ]997.
(v) Seve ra l ti mes, In dia h as been a nonpermanent member of the UN Sec ur ity
Cou nc il. Now, India is d ema nding a
permanent sea t in the Secu rity Co uncil.

II I Disarmament
The foreign policy of Ind ia is opposed to arms
race and advocates d isa nn a m ent, both conventiona l a nd nu clea r. This is aimed at p romoting
world peace and security by reducing or e nding tensions between power blocs and to accc1·
c rate econo mic deve lo pment of the country
by preventing the unproductive expenditure
on the manufacture of arm s. India has been
using the UNO platform to check the arms
race and to achi eve d isa r mament. Indi a took
th e initiative of holdi ng a six-nation s ummit

at New Delh i in 1985 and made co ncrete proposals for n uclear di sa rmam e nt.
By Il ot signing the Nuclear No n-pro] iferation
Treaty (N PT) of 1968 a nd th e Comprehensive
lest Ban Treaty (CfBT) of 1996, India ha s
kept its nuclear options open . India opposes
NPT a nd CTST d ue to th e ir discrimi natory
and hegemo n istic nature. T hey perpcw3te
an internationa l system in which only five
natio ns (USA, Ru ssia, China, UK and France)
can legitimately posses n ucl ea r weapons.

t GUJRAL DOCTRINE
T he Guj ra J Doctr in e is a m il estone in rnd-ia' s
foreign policy. It was propounded a nd in iti·
ated in 1996 by I. K. Guj ra l, t he then Fore ign
Min ister i n the Deve Gowda Government.
T he doctri ne advocates that India , be in g
the biggest co un try in So uth Asia, should
extend unilateral concessions to the sma ller
neighbours. In other words, the doctrine is forIllu lated o n India's acco mm odating a pp roach
towards its s mall er neigh bou rs 011 the ba sis of
t he principl e of non-rec iprocity. It recognises
the sup re m e importa nce of fri endly a nd co r·
d ia l relations with In d ia's neighbours.
The doctrine is a five-point roadmap to
guide the co nduct of Ind ia's foreign relatio ns
with its imm ediate ne ighbours. T hese five
prin cip les a rc as fo ll ows:
1. With t he neighbours lik e Banglad es h,
Bhutan , Maldives, Ne pal and Sri Lanka,
I nel ia shou ld !lot ask for reciprocity, but
give to the m what it ca n in good faith.
2 . No South Asian co untr y should a ll ow it s
lCrritory to be used agai nst t he interest
of a nother cou ntry of the reg ion.
3. No co untry shou ld interfere in the inter·
nal affa irs of another cou n try.
4. All South Asian countries should respect
each oth er's terr itorial integrity and
sove reignty.
5. All South Asia n cou ntries sho ul d settle a ll
the ir di sputes th ro ugh peacefu l bil atera1
negotiation s.
GujraJ h imself e"1Jlained: "Th e log ic behind
the Gujra l Doctrine was t hat sin ce we had to

r

,

Foreign Policy

face two hostile n eighbours in the north and
the west, we had to be at 'total peace' with
2.11 other immediate n eighbours in order to
contain Pakistan's and China's influ ence In
the region."

~ NUCLEAR DOCTRINE OF INDIA

I

India's nucl ear doctrine ca n be summarised
as. fo11ows: 4
1. Building and maintaining a credibl e
minimum dete rrent.
2. A posture of "No First Use~ - nu clea r
weapons will only be used in retaliation
aga inst a nuclea r attack on Indian territory or on Indian forces anywhere.
3. Nuclear retaliation to a first strike will
be ma ssive and design ed to infl ict un ac·
ceptable damage.
4 .. Nuclear retali atory attacks can onl y be
authorised by the civilian political lea dership through the Nucl ea r Command
Authority.
5. Non-use ofnuc1ear weapons against nonnucl ear weapon sta tes.
6. However, in the event of a maj or attack
aga inst India, or Indian forces anywhere,
by biological or ch emical weapons, India
will retain the option of retaliating with
n uclear weapons.
7. A continuance of strict controls o n export
of nucl ear a nd mi ssi le related m ateri als
a nd technologies, participation in the
Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty negotiations, and co ntinu ed observance of the
moratorium on nuclea r tests.
8. Continued commitment to the goa l of
a nuclea r-wea pon-free world, through
global, verifiable and non-discriminatory
nuclear disarmament.
The Nuclear Command Authority co mprises a Politica l Council and an Executive
Co uncil. The Politica l Co un ci l is ch ai red by
the Prime Minister. It is the sale body which
can autho rise the use of nuclear weapons.
4Press Infonnation Bureau, Government of In dia,
January 4, 2003.

~. 611

Th e Executive Co unci l is chaired by the
Nationa l Security Advisor. It provides inputs
for decisi.o n m aking by th e Nuclear Co mm and Authority a nd executes the directives
given to it by the Political Council.

CONNECT CENTRAL ASIA
POLICY OF INDIA
India laun ch ed the "Connect Central Asia"
Policy in 2012. This poli cy is a im ed at
strength ening and expanding of Indi a's relations with the Ce ntral As ian countries. These
countries include Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Thjikistan, Thrkmenistan and Uzbekistan.
India 's "Connect Central Asia" poli cy is
a broad-based a pproach including politi ca l,
security, economic and cultural conn ections.
Its features (or elemen ts) are as follows 5 :
1. India will continue to build on its strong
political relations through th e exchange
of high level visits.
2. India will strengthen its strategic and
security cooperation. The focus wi11 be
on milita ry training, joint resea rch and
counter-terro ri sm coordination .
3. India will step up multilateral engagement with Central Asian partners using
the syn ergy of joint efforts through existing fora like the SCO, Eurasian Economic
Com munity (EEC) and the Custom Union.
4. India looks to Central Asia as a longterm partner in energy, and natural
resources.
5. The m ed ica l field is another area that
offers huge poten ti al for cooperation .
6. India's higher education system delivers at
a fraction of the fees charged by Western
universities. Keeping this in mind, India
would like to assist in th e setti ng up of a
Central Asian University in Bishkek.
7. India is working on setti ng up a Ce ntra l
Asian c-n etwork with its hub in India, to
SBased on Keynote address delivered by Minister
of State for External Affairs. E. Aham ed, at the
first India-Centra l Asia Dialogue, June 12, 2012 at
Bishkek, Kyrgyzsta n.

612

P

Indian Polity

deliver, te le·education and tcl e-medicine
co nnecti vity, linkin g a ll the fi ve Central
Asia n Sta tes.
3. Indian co mpanies ca n showcase Indi a's
ca pability in the construction secto r and
build world class structures at co mpetiti ve rates.
9. As for land co nn ect ivity, Indi a ha s reacti vated the In te rnational No rth-So uth
Tra n sport Corridor (INSTC).
10. Abse nce of a via ble banking infrastruc·
lure in the regi o n is a major barrier
to trade and in vestm e nt. Indi an banks
can expand their prese nce if they see a
favourable policy en vironment.
11 . In dia and Ce ntra l Asian nation s will
jointly work to improve air co nn ec ti vity
betwee n them.
12. Co nnections between the peopl e a rc the
most vital linkilges to susta in th e deep
e ngagem e n t. India a nd Central As ia n
nations wi ll e ncourage regu lar exchanges
of scholars, acade mi cs, c ivi l society an d
youth delegations to gain deeper in sights
in to each other's cul tures.
Indi a's "Connect Ce n tral Asia~ poli cy is
co nso nant with its ove rall policy of dee penin g
e ngage ment in Euras ia, its policy of st re ngthen ing relations with China, with Pakista n,
and buildin g on its traditio na l relation ship
with Ru ss ia . India ho pes that its membership
in numerous regional forum s including at the
SCO, would bolster Ineli a's renewed linkages
with the regio n .

l ACT EAST POLICY OF INDIA
In 2014, the Mod i Government upgraded
India 's "Look East Policy" a nd re-named it as
the "Act Eas t Policy". The "Look East Poli cy"
was first initi ated in 1992 by the then Prime
l'vlini ste r P.V. Na rasim ha Rao.
The features (o r e le m e nts) of India 's ~Act
East Poli cy" are as follows 6 :
1. Ineli a's Act East Poli cy fo c usses on
the extended n e ighb our h ood in the
6Press Inrorm ation Bureau, Go\'crnment of India,

December 23, 2015.

Asia-Pacific reg ion. Th e po li cy which
was originally con ce ived as a n economi c i nit iat ive, ha s ga in ed po litical , strategic and c ultural di mens ions
includin g esta bli s hment o f in st i tutional me c hani s ms for dial og ue and
coo peration .
2. Act East Poli cy has placed emphasis on
Indi a-ASEAN coo peration in our domest ic agenda on infrastructu re, 111Olnufa cturin g, trade, ski ll s, urba n re n ewal,
smart c ities, Ma ke in In dia a nd oth e r
ini tiatives.
3 . The objective of "Ac t East Pol icy" is to
promot e eco n omic coo pe ration , cu lt ural ties and develop stra teg ic rel a tionship with co un tr ies in th e Asia -Pa c ific
region through co ntinuou s e ngagem e n t
at bilateral, regional and multil a te ral
leve ls.
4. T he North East of India has been a prio rity in our Act East Policy. The poli cy
provides an interface between North East
India including the state of Arunachal
Pradesh a nd th e ASEAN regi o n.
5. On the Civ ili zat iona l front, Buddh is t
and Hindu links are be in g e nergi zed to
develop new contacts and connect ivity
betwee n people.
6. On Co nnecti vity, sp ecial efforts a re being
made to develop a coherent strategy, particularly for linking ASEAN with North
East India.
7. India' s econo mi c engagement w i th
ASEAN ha s been stepped up. The ASEANIndia Agreement on Trade in Service and
In vestments has entered in to force fo r
India and seve n ASEAN countri es from
1 Jul y 2015 .

n. On strategi c issues, India ha s inc reased
convergence on security interests with
key partners both in bi lateral and mult ilateral format. Close r cooperatio n in
co mbating terrorism, collaborating for
peace and stability in the region and
promotion of maritim e security based
on intern at ional norm s and laws a re
being pursued.

<

In this Part...
•

89. Notional Commission to Review
the Working of the Constitution

CHAPTE'."

89

National Commission
to Review the
Working of the
Constitution

he National Commission to Review the
Working of the Constitution (NCRWC)
was set up by a resolution of the Government ofInd ia in 2000. It was an ll-member
Commission headed by M.N. Venkatachaliah,
the fonner Chief Justice of India '.It submitted
its report in 2002.

T
1

t TERMS OF REFERENCE

According to th e terms of reference, th e
com mi ssion was required to examine, in
the light of the experien ce of the past fifty
years, as to how far the existing provisions of
the Constitution are ca pable of respondin g
to the n eeds of efficient, smooth and effective
'The other members of the Commission were: B.P.
Jeevan Reddy (Chairman of the Law Commission ),
R.S. Sarkaria (fonner judge of the Supreme Court),
K. Punnayya (former judge of the Andhra Pradesh
High Court), SoH Sorabjee (Attorney-General of
India), K. Parasaran (fonner Attorney- General of
India), Subhash Kashyap (fonner Secretary-Genera l
of Lok Sabha), C.R. Irani (Chief Editor and MD of
the Statesman), Abid Hussain (former Ambassador
of India to the USA) , Smt. Sumitra Kulkarni (fonner
MP) and P.A. Sangma (form e r Speaker of the Lok
Sabha). P.A. Sangma resigned three months before
the submission of the report by the Comm ission.

system of governance and socio·econ omi c
development of modern India and to recom·
mend ch anges, if any. The terms of reference
clearly specified that the commission should
recommend changes that arc required to be
made in the Con stitution within th e frame. work of parliamentary democracy and with·
out interfering with the 'basic structure' or
'basic features' of the Co n stitution.
The commi ssion clarified that its task was
to review the working of the Constitution and
not to rewrite it and its function was only
recommendatory and a d ~isory in nature. It
was left to the Parliament to accept or reject
any of the recommendations.
The commission had no agenda before it.
On its own , it identified the cleven areas of
study and proposed to exa mine them . They
included the following 1 :
1. Strengthening the institutions of parlia·
mentary democracy (working of the
Legislature, th e Executive and the
Judici ary; their accountability; problems
of ad ministrative, socia l and econ omic
cost of political instability; exploring the
possibilities of stability within the disci·
pline of pa rl iamentary democracy).
2Report of the Commissio n, Volume I, Chapter 1.

o

614

,rf'/

Indian Polity

2. Electoral reforms; sta nda rds in po liti ca l
life.
3. Pace ofsocio~economic change and development u nder the Constita tion (ass ur<I nee of social and economic rights: how
fair? how fast? how equal ?) .
4 . Promoting literacy; generating employment; ensuring social sec urity; a ll eviation of pove rty.
5. Union-State rel at ion s.
6. Dece ntralization and devo lution; e mpowerment and strengthenin g of Panchayati
Raj In stitu t ion s.
7. Enlarge me nt of Fundamental Rights.
H. Effectuation of Fundam e ntal Duti es.
9. Effectuation of Directive Principles and
achievement of the Preambular objecti ves of th e Constitutio n.
to. Lega l control of fi sca l and mon etary policies; publi c audit mec hani sm.
]]. Administrative syste m a nd standards in
publi c li fe.

t AREAS OF CONCERN
The following are th e importan t areas of
co ncern according to th e perce ption of the
Commissio n:':
1. There is a fundamental breac h of the
constitutional faith on the part of
Governments a nd the i r method of
governance lies in the neglect of the
peo ple who are the ultimate source of
all politi ca l authority. Publi c se rvants
and in stituti ons are not a li ve to the
basic imperati ve that they are serva nts
of the people meant to se rve them. The
dignity of the indi vidua l enshrined in
the Constitution has remained an unredeemed pledge. There is, t hus, a loss
of faith in the Governments and governan ce. Citizens see their Governments
besieged by un co ntrolla ble eve nts and
are losing faith in institutions. Soc iety
is tinable to cope up with curre nt events.
2 . The foremost a rea of conce rn is the prese nt nature of th e Indian State and its
3Rcport or t he COlll mi ssion, Volum e I, Cha pte r 2.

inability to anticipate and provid e for
th e great globa l forces of c hange ushered
in by the pa ce of sc ie ntifi c a nd technological deve lopm e nts.
3. The next and equally important dimensio n is the increasing cost of government
a nd fisca l defi cits which are a larming.
4. There is a pervasive impuri ty of the poiitic.:11
climate a nd of poli tical activity, Crimina lisation of politi cs, polit ica l-co rruption
and the poli tician-crim inal-bureaucratic
nexus have reached unprecede nted level s
of needing strong syste mic changes.
5, Issues of nationa l in teg ri ty and security
have not rece ived adequa te and thoughtful attention. Mechanisms for the assessment of earl y warning sy mptom s of
soc ia l unrest are a bse nt. Mecha nisms for
adequate and immediate st.ate responses
to emergenc ies and di saste r ma nagem ent
are wholly inadequa te. Administra tion , as
a system for anticipating co ming even ts
a nd plannin g respo nses in adva nce, ha s
failed. It ha s become un-coordin a ted
and directio nless amalgam of diffe re nt
departments often with over-lapping and
eve n mutua ll y co nfli cting jurisdict ion s,
powers a nd responsibilities which m erely
acts as a reaction to probl e ms. There are
no clear-cut sta ndards or basis fo r fixing
responsibilities.
6 _ Though India's overa ll record and experie n ce as a working democracy (despite
many ce n t rifugal forces) are worthy to
mentio n and though the bases of de mocrati c debate have widened with the 73rd
a nd 74t h Co n stitutional amendments,
the wo rking of the institutions of par·
li a mentary democracy, howeve r, have
thrown-up se riou s fault- lin es, which
might, i f unatte nded, prove dest ru ctive
of the basic democratic va lues,
7. There is pervas ive misuse of the electoral process and the e lec toral syste m is
unable to prevent th e entry of pe rsons
with criminal record into the porta l of
law-m aking institution s.
8, The Parliame nt and the State Legislatures,
owing to the inhe rent weakness of the

I

(

Notional Commission to Review the Working o(the Constitution

electo ral system , have failed to acqui re
adequ ate represe ntative cha racter.
9. The increa sing instab ility of the electe d
gover nm ents is attrib utable to oppo rtunistic politic s and unpri nciple d defections. The eco nomic and ad minis trative
costs of politi cal instab ility a re un affordab ly hi gh and their impa ct on the
polity is n ot clearl y comp reh ended
and realiz ed. Thoug h just four Prime
Min isters ruled the count ry for 40 years
out of the 54 years of indep enden ce a nd
one political party alone was in power
for 45 years, however, 1989 on wards the
count ry saw five Gen eral Electi ons to
the Lok Sabha. Costs of this politica l
instab ility are simpl y colossa l.
10. The state of the Indian econ omy is disturbin g. The econo my is gradu ally sinking into a deb t-trap. Econo mic, fiscal
a nd mone tary polici es, coupl ed with
admin istrati ve ineffic iency, corrup tio n
and wasteful expen diture are increa singl y pushin g the society into extra-l egal
system s, crim e-sy ndi cates, mob-r ule a nd
hoodl um out·fits. Black-money, parall el
econ omy an d even parall el gover nment s
are the overar ching econo mic and social
realiti es. Legitimate gover nment s will, in
due course, find it increa si ngly diffi cult
to confro nt them. In course of time these
illegal crimin al out-fits win dictat e terms
to the legitim ate gover nment s.
11. Rural de-population, urban izatio n, urban ·
con gestio n and social unres t n eed imme ·
diate attention and soluti ons. Increa sing
unem ploy m ent will prove a seriou s
threat to orderl y gover nmen t.
12. Future of society is increasingly knowledgebased and knowledge-driven. The qualit y
of education and the highe r research need
urgen t repair. The count ry is engaged in
a unilat eral and unthin king educa tional
disarm ament.
13. System of admin istrati on of justice in the
count ry is anoth er area of co ncern .
14. Crimi nal justic e system is on the verge
of collap se. The qualit y of invest igations and prosec utions requires a stron g

'"\..:i

615
"

seco nd look. Law's delay and costs
of litiga t ion have beco me prove rbia1.
Victimology, victim ·prote ction and protectio n of witnesses in sensitive criminaltrials n eed institu tional arrang ement s.
Recru itmen t, traini ng, re fresh er a nd
con tinuin g legal educa tio n for lawyers,
judge s and judici al admin istrato rs need
imme diate attent ion . The in creas in g
utiliza tio n of altern ative dispute resolution m echan i sm s such as media tion ,
con ciliati o n and arbitration as well as
m echan i sm s of auxi liary adjud icativ e
servic es need to be stressed.
15. Com muna l and other inter-group riots in a
countr y like India with its religio us, social
and cultural divers ity canno t be treated as
merel y law and order proble m. They are
manif estatio ns of collec tive behav ioural
disorders. Legal and admin istrati ve measures are requir ed to be taken to remov e
the insecu rity felt by the minor ities and
for bringi ng them into the m ainstr eam of
the nation al fabric .
16. The state of social infras tructu re is disturbing. There are 380 millio n childr en
below the age of l4. The arrangements for·
their educa tion, health and well-being are
wholly inadeq uate both qualitatively and
quantitatively. 96.4 per cent of the primary
educa tion budge t goes for salaries alone.
17. Rates of infant mortality, blindn ess, maternal mortality, maternal-an emia, child malnutriti on and child-i mmun izatio n, despite
sign ifican t progress achieved, yet remai n
at high and discon certin g levels.
I S. Public health and hygien e have not received
adequate attenti on. There is an alarm ing
increa se in infect ious diseases such as
Thberculosis, Malari a, Hepatitis, HIV etc.

~ RECOMMENDATIONS
In all, the comm ission made 249 recom menda tions. Of them, 58 recom menda tions involve
amend men ts to the Constitution, 86 involve legisl~4'1~ iw.~.~4~, ftPq.; !h~~mf4 init1g-!.os:

W.m'

mendation's""Cddld ' be 'accom pHshe d ' throug h
executive action .

616

P

Indian Polity

The vario us recommendations of the co mmissio n arc mentioned below in an area-w ise
man ner 4 :

i l iOn Fundamental Rights
1. Th e scope of prohibition agai nst dis-

cri minati o n ( under Articles ] 5 and 16)
shou ld be extended to in clude 'ethn ic or
soci al orig in , politi ca l or other opin ion,

property or birth '.
2. The freedom of speech and expressio n
(under Art icl e 19) should be expanded
to incl ude expl icitly 'the freedom of th e
press a nd other media, the free dom to
h old op ini ons and to seek, receive an d
im pa rt information a nd idea s'.
3. T he following sho uld be a dded as n ew
Fu ndamental Ri ghts:
(a ) Right agai nst torture, cruelty an d
inhum an treatment o r punishm e n t.
(b) Right to co mpensation if a pe rson is
ill egall y dep ri ved of his/h e r ri ght
to life or libe rty.
(c) Right to leave a nd to return to In dia.
(d) Right to privacy a nd fa mily life.
ee) Right to rura l wage emp loyment fo r
a mi nimu m of 80 days in a yea r.
ef) Right to access to courts a nd tribun a ls
an d speedy just ice.
(g) Right to equal justice and free legal
aidS.
(h ) Right to care and assistance and protection ( in case of chi ld ren).
(i) Right to safe drinking water, p revention of pollution, co nservation of
ecology and susta inable development.
4. The right to education (under Article 21 -A)
should be en larged to read as: 'Every chi ld
shall have the right to free education un til
he completes the age of fourteen years; and
in the case of girls and members of the
4C hapters 3 to JO in Volume I of th e RepOrt of th e
Comm ission comains the detailed area-wise recomme ndations. T he su mmary of recommendations is
given in Chapter 11 of the Repon.
SAt present, it is a Directive Principle under Article 39-A.

SCs a nd S1S until they co mplete the age of
eighteen years'.
5. 1\\'0 changes should be made witb respect
to preventive dete nti on (under Article 22),
namel y, (i) the ma ximum period of preventive de tention should be six months;
and (ii) the advisory board should consist
of a chainllan and two other members
a nd they shou ld be se rvi n g judges of any
hi gh co urt .
6. Sikhism, Jaini sm an d Buddhism should
be treated as reli gions sepa rate from
Hinduism and the prov ision s grou pi ng
th e m togeth e r ( under Article 25) sh ou ld
be deleted. At present, the word ' Hi ndu'
is defined to incl ude these religions also.
7. T h e protection from judi cia l rev iew
afforded by Article 31-B to th e Acts
and Regulations specified in the Nin th
Schedu le shou ld be restricted to onl y
those whi ch relate to (i) agrarian refonn s,
(ii) reservatio ns, a nd (i ii) the imp'lementation of Directive Principles specified in
clause (b) or (e) of Article 39.
8. No suspension of th e e nforcemen t of the
Fu ndamenta l Rights under Articles 17, 23,
24, 25 a nd 32 in addition to those under
Arti cles 20 and 2] during the operation of
a nationa l em ergency (under Article 352).

fl i On Right to Property
Article 300-A shou ld be recast as fo ll ows:
1 . Deprivation or acqui s ition of property
sha ll be by author ity of law and o nl y
for a publi c purpose.
2 . There shall be n o arbitrary deprivation
or acq uis ition of property.
3. No deprivation or acqui sition of agricu ltura l, forest and non -urban homestead
land belonging to or c ustomari ly used
by the SCs and S15 sha ll take pla ce
exce pt by a uthority of law which p rovides for su itab le rehabilitation sch eme
before taking possess ion of such land . In
bri ef, a right to 'su itable rehabilitation '
for the SCs a nd STh if their la nd is to be
acq ui red.

National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution

il iOn Directive Principles
1. The heading of Part-I V of the Constitution
should be amended to read as 'Directive
Principles of State Policy and Action'.
2. A n ew Directive Principle on control of
population should be added.
3. An inde'p endent Natio nal Education
Commission should be set-u p every five
years.
4. An Inter-Fa ith Commission should be
established to promote inter-religious
harmony a nd social solidarity.
5. There must be a body of high status to
review the level of impleme ntation of
the Directive Principles.
6. A strategic Plan of Action should be initiated to create a large number of employment opportunities in five years.
7. Impleme ntation of the recommendations
contain ed in the Report of the Nationa l
Statistical Commission (2001).

El lOn Fundamental Duties
1. Cons ideration should be given to the

ways and means by which Fundamental
Duties could be popularized and made
effective.
2. T h e recommendations of the Justice
Verma Co mmittee on operationaJisation of Fundamental Duties should be
implemented at the earliest6 .
3. The following new fundamental duties
should be included in Article 51-A:
(a) Duty to vote at elections, actively participate in the democratic process
of governance and to pay taxes.
(b) 1b foster a spirit of family va lues
and responsible parenthood in the
matter of education, physical and
moral well-being of children.
&rhe Government of India appointed the committee
"to operationalise the suggestions to teach fundamental Duties to the citizens of India ~ in the year
1998 unde r the chairmanship of Justice J.S. Verma.
The Committee submitted its report in October 1999.

~, 617

(e) Duty of industrial organizations to
provide education to children of
their employees.

Ell

On Parliament and State
Legislatures

1. The privileges of legislators should be
defined and delimited for the free and
independent functioning of Parliament
and state legislatures.
2. Article 105 may be amended to clarify
that the immunity enjoyed by members
under parliamentary privileges does
not cover corrupt acts committed by
them in connection with their duties
in the House or otherwise. Further,
no co urt would take cog ni za n ce of
any offence arising out of a member's
action in the House without prior sanction of the Speaker/Chairman. Article
194 may also be si mil a rly amended
in relation to the members of state
leg islatures.
3. The domiciliary requirement for eligibility to contest elections to Rajya Sabha
from the concern ed state should be
maintained. This is essential to ens ure
the federal character of the Rajya Sabha.
4. The MP local area development scheme
shou ld be discontinued.
5. The Election Comm iss ion sh ould be
empowered to identify and declare the
various offices und er the central and
state governments to be 'offices of profit'
for the purposes of being chosen, and
for being, a member of the appropriate
legisla ture.
6. Immediate steps be taken to set up a
Nodal Standing Committee on National
Economy.
7. A Sta nding Constitution Committee of the
two Houses of Parliament for a priori
scrutiny of constitutional ame ndm ent
proposals should be set up.
8. A new Legislation Committee of Parliament to oversee and coordinate legislative planning should be constituted.

618 ,(J Indian Pality
9. The existing Parliamentary Co mmittees
on Est imates, Public Undertakings and
Subordinate Leg islati on may not be
continued.
10. The Parliamentarians mu st voluntar il y
place them selves open to publi c scrutiny
through a parliam en tary ombuds m a n .
n . The State Legislatures with less than 70
m embers should meet for at least 50 days
in a year and other State Legislatures fo r
a t least 90 days. Similarl y, th e minimum
numbe r of days for sittings of Rajya
Sabha and Lok Sa bha shouJd be fi xed at
100 and 120 days respective ly.
12. A Study Group outs ide Parliament for
study of procedural reforms should be
set up.

El lOn Executive and Administration
1. In case of hun g .Parliame nt, th e Lok

Sa bha Illay elect the l e ad c.T of th e
House. He/ she may th en be a ppointed
as th e pr ime mini ste r by the President.
The same procedure co uld be followed
at the state leve l a lso.
2. A motio n of no~confid e n ce against a
prim e minister mu st be accompanied
by a proposal of alternative leader to
be voted si multan eo usly. Thjs is call e d
as tbe 'system of constru ctive vote of no
confiden ce'.
3. For a m otion of no ~co n fi den ce to be
brought out against the government, at
least 20 per cent of t he total numbe r of
members of the House should give notice.
4. The practice of having oversized Coun c il
of Ministers should be prohibited by law.
A ce iling on the number of Min isters in
a ny State or the Union gove.rnmen t be
fixed at th e maximum of 10 per cent of
the total strength of the popu] ar house
of the legisla ture.
5. The practi ce o f creating a number of
poli tical offices lvith the position , perks
and pri vileges of a mini ster should be
d iscou.ra ged. Th e ir number should be
limited to 2 per cent of the total strength
of th e lower house.

6. T he Consti tution should provid e for
appointment of LokpaJ keeping the prime
minister outside its purvi ew and the in s ti ~
tUDon of 10kayuktas in the sL1tes.
7. Lateral e ntry into gove rnment jobs above
joint secretary leve l should be al1ow-ed.
8. Article 311 should be amended to e nsure
not on ly protection to the hon est publi c
serva nts but penalisatio n to di shonest
o nes.
9. The questions ofpersonllel poli cy includ~
ing place men ts, promotions, tra nsfe rs
a nd fast~track advancements sh ould be
m a naged by a utonom ous Civil Se rv'ice
Boards co n stit uted under statutory
provisio ns.
10. Officials, be fore starting their caree r,
in addition to the takin g o f a n oath
of loya lty to the Co n stitu tion , sho uld
swea r to a bid e by the principl es of good
governance.
11. Righ t to infor mation sh ou ld be gua ra nteed and the tradH ional insistence on
secrecy should be di scarded. In fac t,
there should be an oath of transpare ncy
in place of a_n oath of secrecy.
12. Publi c lnte rest Disclosure Acts (wh ic h
are popularly ca lled t he Whi s tJ e ~blowe r
Acts) may be enacted to fight corruptio n
and ma l-admjl1istrati on .
13. A law should be e na cted to provide for
forfe iture ofb enam.i proper ty of corrupt
publi c servan ts as well as non-publ ic
se rva nts.

i l i on Centre-State and Inter-State
Relations
J. The Lnter~State Coun cil Order of 1990 may
clearly spec ify th e matters that shou ld
form th e parts of co nsultat ion s.
2. Ma nagement of disasters and emergenc ies
(both natura l and manmade) should be
included.in the List III (Concurren t List)
of th e Seventh Schedul e.
3. A statutory body call ed the Inter~State
Trade and Com m erce Com mi ssio n
should be estabI ished.

National Commission to Review theWorkin a the Constitutio.n

4 . The President should appoint the governor of a state only after consultation
with the chief minister of that state.
S. Article 356 should not be deleted, but it
must be used sparingly and only as a
remedy of the last resort.
6 . The question whether the ministry in
a state has lost the confidence of the
assembly or not should be tested only
on the floor of the House. The Governor
should not be allowed to dismiss the
ministry, so long as it enjoys the confidence of the Bouse.
7. Even without the state being under a proclamation of emergency, President's Rule
may be continued if elections cannot be
held. Article 356 should be amended to
this effect.
8. The State A.ssembly should not be dissolved before the proclamation issued
under Article 356 has been laid before
Parliament. Article 356 should be
amended to ensure this.
9 . River water disputes between States and/
or the Centre should be heard and disposed by a bench of not less than three
judges and if necessary, a bench of five
judges ofthe Supreme Court for the final
disposal of the suIt.
10. Parliament should replace the River
Board!' Act of 1956 with another comprehensive enactment after cpnsultation
with all the states.
11 . When the state bill is reserved for consideration of the President, there !,'h ould be
a time-limit (say three months) within
which fhe President shpuld take a decision whether to give his/her ,a ssent or
to return the 'bill.

mi l On Judiciary
1. A National Judicial Commission under

the Constitution .should be established
to recommend the appointment of
judges of the Supreme Cpurt. It should
comprise the chief justi.ce of India (as
chairman), two senior most Judges
of the Supreme Court, the Union law

619

minister aDd oQ.e p\,:r.sPll nomin~ted by
the P.resident.
Z. A committ~e pf tbe NatjonaJ Judicial
Commission I'hoJJld examine complaints
of deviant behaviour of the Supreme
Court and h.1gb cpurt judges,
3. The retirement age of the judges of high
courts and Supreme Court should be
increased to 65 amI 6.8 respectively.
4. No court otl:ter than the S!lpreme Court
and the High Courts shol,lld have the
power to punish for contempt of itself.
5. Except for the Supreme Court and the
High Courts, no other court s}19uld
have the power to declare the .Acts of
Parliament and State Legislatures as
being uJlconsiitlltipof).l orbeyoml legislative competence and so J..Iltra-Yircs.
6. A National Judicial CounCil and Judicial
Councils in States sbould be setpp for
the preparation pf pl;ms and annual
budget proposal$.
7. In the Supreme Court a-n d the Hjgh
Courts, judgemen~s sboJ..lld ordin.arily
be deHvered within 90 days frOIl) the
~o:nclusionof the case.
8. An award of e",er:nplilfY co.s~ shol.lld be
given in appropriate cases .of ibu_se of
process of law.
9 . Each High Court .s hould prep.are .a stra't egic plan -for time-pound cle.arance of
arrears it} court,'l within its JuriSdiction.
No case to remain pending for more
than one year.
10. The system .of plca-pargaining should
be introduced as part of the process of
decrim inalization.
11. The hierarchy ofthe subordinate cpurts
in t'h e COUJltry .§h9Uld be brougbt down
to ,a two-tier !>ubordinate judiciary under
the High Court.

I

PI On Pace of Socio-Economic Change
and Development

1. A way could and should be found to bring
a re_asonable number pf SCs, S'IS and .PCs
Dn to the bene.h es of the Supreme Court
and high courts.

620

,(J' Indian Polity

2 . Socia l policy should a im at ena bling the
SCs, STh and Bes an d with parti c ular
atte nt ion to the g irl s to co mpete o n
equal terms with th e gen era l ca tegory.
3. Appropriate new institut io ns sho uld be
establis hed to e nsure tha t the resources
ea rmarked for the weaker sectio ns 'Ire
optimally used.
4. Th e Citi ze ns' Charters be prepared by
every se r vice provi din g de partm ent!
age ncy to enumerate the c ntitl emc m s
of the citizens spec ifically those of the
SCs, 5Th and other deprived classes.
5. Rese rva tion for SCs, 8Th and Bes sho uld
be brought under .J statute cove ring all
aspects of reservation including sett ing
up of Araksh<1n Nyaya Ad alats to adju.
dicate upon all di sputes pertc1in ing to
reservation.
6. Reside ntia l sc hoo ls for SCs, STh and BCs
sho uld be eSG.lb lished in every di stri ct
in th e co untry.
7. All tribal areas governed by the F'ifth
Sc hedul e of the Co nstitution should be
tran sfe rred to the Sixth Schedule. Other
tribal areas should al so be brought
und er the Sixth Schedule.
8. Specia l courts exclusively to try offences
unde r the 5Cs and 5Th ( Preve nti on of
Atrocities) Act, 1989, shou1d be established .
9. Preve ntion of untouchabili ty req uires, inter
alia, effective puniti ve action under the
Protection of Civil Rights Act, J955.
10 . The Employment of Manual Scave ngers
and Co n struction of Dr y Latrine s
(Prohibition) Act, 1993, should be stri ctly
enforced.
11. Steps should be taken for improvement
of educational standards as well as for
in creas ing the polit ica l representation
of the minority co mmuniti es.
12. A full y empowered Na tion a l Authority
for the Liberat ion and Re hab ili tation of
bonded labour should be set up. Simil ar
authorities should a lso be established at
th e state level.
13 . As regards women, actions cove ring reservations, development, empowerment,

hea lth and prorectio n aga in st vio len ce
shou ld be taken.

I

Il!J On Decentralisation (Panchayats
and Municipalities)

] . The Eleventh and 1\velfth Schedul es of
the Co n st itution shou ld be restructured in a mann e r th at creates a separate fi sca l do main for panchayats a nd
111 un ici p;:t l ities.
2. State pan c hayat co uncil shou ld be established under the c hai r ma nship o f [he
c hief mini ste r.
3. Panchayats and Muni cipa li ties sho ul d be
catego ri ca lly declared to be ' inst ituti ons
of se lf-go\'e rnm e nt ' and excl usive function s be aSS ign ed to them . For thi s purpose, Articles 243-G and 243-W should
be suitabl y a mcnded.
4. 'n lC Electio n Commission of Jndia should
have the power to issue direct ion s to
the Sta te Election Co mmiss ion for the
discharge o f its fun c tions. Th e State
Election Co mmiss ion should submit its
annual or specia l reports to the Election
Co mmission of Jndi a and to the Governor.
T hi s requires the a mendm e nt of Articles
243-K and 243-ZA.
5 . Article 243-E shou ld be amended to the
effect that a reasonab le opportunity
of being h eard s hall be given to a
Pan chayat be fore it is disso lved.
6. 1b e nsure uniformity in t he practice
relating to a udi t of accounts, the CAG of
India should be empowered to co ndu ct
the audit or lay dOW11 a cco unting sta ndard s for Pan chayats.
7. Wh e never a Municipality is supe rseded,
a report stat in g the grounds for such
disso luti on should be pla ced before thc
State Lcgis lature.
8 . All provisions regarding qua lifi ca tions
and disqualifi cations for e lections to
IOu1 1 authorities should be con so lidated
in a singl e law.
9 . Th e fun ctions of delimitation, rescn'ation
and rotation of sca ts should be vestcd in

National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution

a Delim itation Co mmissio n and not in
the State Electi on Comm i ssion.
10. The co ncept of a distin ct an d separa te
t.ax doma in for munic ipaliti es should be
recogn ized.

111 1On Institutions in North East India
1. Efforts are to b e made to give all the

Sta tes in this region th e oppor tuniti es prov ided under the 73rd and 74th
Co n stituti onal Amen dmen ts. However,
this should be done with due rega rd to
the uniqu e politic al tradit ion s of the
region .
2. The subje cts give n under the Sixt h
Sched ul e a nd those menti oned in the
Eleven th Sched ule could be entrus ted to
the Autonomous District Councils (ADCs).
3 . 'Traditional forms of govern ance should be
associ ated with self-govern an ce beca use
of the presen t dissat isfact ion.
4. A Nation al Immig ration Counc il should
be set up to exami ne a range of issues
includ ing a review of the Citizenship Act,
the m egal Migra nts Deter minat ion by
Tribunal Act, the Foreigners Act and so on.

III 1 On Electoral Processes
1. Any person charge d with any offenc e

punis hable with impri sonm ent for a
maxim um term of five years or more,
should b e disqua lified from being chose n
as or for being a member of Parlia ment
or Legisl ature of a State.
2. Any perso n convic ted for any heino us
crim e like murder, rape, smuggling, dacoity, etc., should be perma nently debar red
from contesting for any politic al office.
3 . Crimi nal cases aga inst politic ian s pending before Court s either for trial or in
appea l must b e di sposed of speedi1 y, if
necess ary, by appOi nting Special Court s.
4. The election petitio ns shoul d also be
decide d by sp ecial courts. In the alternative, specia l electi on b en ches may
be con stitute d in the Hi gh Court s a nd

~, 621

ea rma rked excl usively for the dispos al of
elect ion petitio ns and electi on di sputes.
5. Any syste m of State fundin g of elect ions
bea rs a close n exu s to the regula tion of
work ing of politi ca l parties by law a nd
to the creati on of a foolpr oof m echanism u nder law with a view to imple menti ng the financ ial limits stri ctl y.
There fore, propo sals for State fundin g
shoul d be deferr ed t ill these regul ato ry
mech anism s are firmly in positi on.
6. Candi dates should not be allowed to contest electi on simul taneo usly for the sa me
office from more than one co nstitu ency.
7. The electi on code of co nduct should b e
give n the sa nctity of law and its violation sh ou ld attrac t pen al action .
8. The Comm i ssion while recog nizing the
benef icial poten tial of the system of run
off co ntest elect in g the repres entati ve
winni ng on the basis of 50 per cent plus
one vote pol1ed, as again st the prese nt
first-p ast-th e-post syste m, for a more
repres entati ve demo cracy, recom mend s
that the Gover nm ent and the Electi on
Com missio n of India shoul d exam ine
thi s issue of prescr ibing a minim um of
50 per cen t plus one vote for election in
all its aspect s.
9. An independent candid ate who loses election three times co nsecu tively should be
pe rman ently deb arred from conte st in g
electi on to the same office.
10. Th e minim um numb er of valid votes
pon ed should be in creased to 25 per cent
from the curren t 16.67 per cent as a condition for the depos it not being forfeited.
11 . The issue of eligibility of non-In dian born
citizen s or those whose paren ts or grandparen ts were citizen s of India to hold high
offices in the realm such as Presid ent,
Vice-President, Prime Minis ter and Chief
Justic e of India should be exami ned in
depth throug h a politic al process after a
national dialogue7 .
7The Comm ission was deeply divided on this
issue and because of this, P.A. Sa ngma left the
Comm ission .

622

x7

Indian Policy

12. The Chief Election Commissioner and the
other Election Commissioners should be
appointed on the recommendation of a
body consisting of the Prim e Minister,
Leader of the Opposition in the Lok
Sab ha, Leader of the Opposition in the
Rajya Sabha, the Speaker of the Lok
Sabha and the Deputy Chairman of the
Rajya S'lbha. Similar procedure should
be adopted in the case of appointment
of State Electio n Commissioners.

III I On Political Parties
1. A comprehensive law regulating the reg-

istration and functioning of politica l
parties or alliances of partjes sho uld be
made. The proposed Jaw sh ould(a) provide that politica l party o r alliance should keep its doors open
to all citizens irrespective of any
distinctions of caste, commun ity or
the like.
(b) make it compulsory for the parties to
maintain accounts oftbe receipt of
funds and expenditure in a systematic and regular way.
(c) make it compulsory for the poli tica l
parties requ iring their can didates to
declare their assets and liabilities at
the time oftTIing their notnination .
(d) provide that no politi C<11 party should
provide t icket to a candidate if he/
she was convicted by any court for
any criminal offence or if the co urts
have framed criminal charges against
him / her.
(e) specifically provide that ifany party
violates the above provision, the
candidate involved should be li able
to be disqua lified and the party
deregistered and derecognized.
2. The Election Commission should progressive ly increase the threshold criterion
for eligibility for recognition so that the

prol iferat ion of sma ll er politic;:.1 parties
is discouraged.
3. A co mprehensive legislation providing
for regulation of con tributions to the
political parties and towards election
expenses s hould be enacted by co nsolidating such laws. This new law should:
(a) aim at br inging tran sparency into
politkal funding;
(b) permit co rporate donat ions within
higher prescribed limits;
(e) make donations up to a specified
limit tax exempt;
(d) make both donors and donees of
political funds accounta ble;
(e) provide that audited political party
accounts should be published yearly;

and
(f) provide for de-recognition of the
party a nd enforcement of penalties
for filing fa lse election returns.

111 1On Ant i- Defection Law
T he provis ion s of the Tenth Schedu le of the
Con st itution should be amended to provide
the fo ll owing:
] . All persons defecting (whether individually or in gro ups) from the party or the
alli ance of parties, 011 whose ticket they
had been elected, must res ign from the ir
parliamentary or assembly seats a nd
must contest fresh elections.
2. The defectors shou ld be debarred to ho ld
any public office of a minister or any
other remunerative political post for at
least the duration of the remaining ternl
of the ex ist ing legislature or until the
next elections whichever is eilrlier.
3. The vote cast by a defector to topple a
government should be treated as invalid.
4. The power to decide questions regarding
disqualification on ground of defectio n
shou ld vest in the Election Commission
inste':ld of in the Speaker/ Chairman of
the Hou se con cerned.

In this Part...
90. Landmark Judgements and Their Impact

CHAPT &
.. II

90

TROMESH THAPPAR CASE (1950)
Name of the Case
Year of Judgement
Popular Name
Related Thpic/ Issue
Related Article!
Schedule

Romesh Thappar vs.
State of Madras

1950
Cross Roads case
Freedom of the press
19

Supreme Court Judgement: It held that
the freedom of speech and expression under
Article 19(1)(a) includes freedom of propagation of ideas, and that freedom is ensured
by the freedom of circulation. It also ruled
that without liberty of circulation, the publication would be of little value. Therefore, the
order of the Madras government banning the
entry and circulation of the weekly English
Journal Cross Roads published at Bombay
was declared as unconstitutional and void.
The Madras government had issued the ban·
ning order under the provisions.of Section 9
(1-A) of the Madras Maintenance of Public
Order Act, 1949. The Supreme Court observed
that the freedom of speech and freedom of
the press lay at the foundation of an democratic organisations, because without free
political discussion no public education
(wbich is so essential for the proper fun ctioning of the process of popular govern·
ment) is possible.

91. Important Doctrines of Constitutional
Interpretation

Landmark
Judgements and
Their Impact
Impact of the Judgement: As a sequel to
this judgement, the 1st Amendment Act
(1951) added "public order" as a reasonable
restriction under Article 19(2) on the freedom of speech and expression. The Supreme
Court held that restrictions on the freedom
of speech and expression could be imposed
only on the grounds mentioned in Article
19(2). Accordingly, the court refused to permit restrictions on the ground of public order
because it was not mentioned in Artic1e 19(2).
It said that the ordinary or local breaches of
public order were no grou~ds for imposing
restrictions on the freedom of speech and
expression. It further observed that the term
"public order" has wide connotation and signifies that state of tranquility which prevails
among the members of political society as
a result of internal regulations enforced by
the government which they have established.

TA _K_ GOPALAN CASE (1950)
Name of the Case : A.K. Gopalan vs. State
of Madras
Year of Judgement : 1950
Popular Name
Preventive Detention
case
Related Thpic/
Procedure established
Issue
by law
Related Article!
21 & 22
Schedule

624

,r(! Indian Polity

Sup re me Cou rt Jud ge me nt: It i nva lidated
Sec t io n 14 of the i m p ug n ed Preve n t ive
Dete n ti on Act ( 1950) on th e gro und th at it
vio lates the fundam e ntal r ight guaranteed
u nde r Art icle 22. It said that t he om iss ion
o f th is sect ion will n ot c hange t he natu re
or the st ruc t u re or the object of th e leg islatio n . Th erefore, it declared the rcst of t he
Act a s val id a nd effect ive. furthe r, it he ld
that t he expressio n 'persona l l iberty ' u nder
Article 21 mcans li be rty of the phys ica l
body, i.e. , freedo m from phys ica l res trai n t
o r de tention. ?,llo reover, it ru led t hat Article
21 is a p rotection o nl y agai nst t he exec ut ive
an d n ot agai n st th e leg islat ure.
Impact of th e Judge me n t: In t hi s judgement, the Su pre me Court has ta ken a narrow
(rest ri ct ive) in terp retation of the Article
2 J . In oth e r wo rcis, the Sup reme Court has
adopted a 'text ua l ist a p proach ' in the i nterp retat io n of the co nst it ution. It he ld that
the word ' law' in Article 21 was used in t he
se n se of state-made law a nd n ot in t he se n se
of jus naturale i.e., the pri nc ip les of natural
ju stice. I-Ie n ce, it dec la red t hat the ex pressio n ' procedure estab li shed by law' in Art icle
21 cannot be i n terpreted to mea n the same
lh i ng as t ha t of th e Amer ican ex p ress io n of
the 'du e process of law'. Thi s decla ration ,
i n effect, amou n ted to hold in g t hat t he protectio n u nder Art icl e 21 is ava il ab le o n ly
agai n st arb it rary exec utive act io n a n d not
fro m arbitrary leg islati ve act.ion. T hi s judgemen t h e ld th e fie ld for n ea rl y t h ree dec'Hles
(1950 to 1978). T h is jud icial interpretation
re'lc hed its logica l e nd i n A.D.M. j aba(pur
case] ( 1976). Bu t, in Ma ncka Ga nd hi cilse 2
(1978) , the Supre m e Co u rt over ru led th e
above judge me n t by tak i ng a wider i nte rp retat io n of the Articl e 21.
I/LD.M. !aba /p ur vs. Shivaka /l ' Sizukla ( 1976). Th is

case is popula rly known as the Habeas Co rpu s
case.

2M{IIICka Camilli' vs. Union of illd ia ( 1978). T h is case

is popularly known as the Personal Liberty c<1.Sc.

CHAMPAKAM DORAIRAJAN
CASE (1951)
State of Ma d ra s vs.
Cha mpakam Dorairajan
Year of J udgeme nt: 1951
Popu lar Na me
Co mmu nC:11 rese rvat io n
Rela ted Topic /
in admi ssio n to ed ucaIss ue
tio nal in stitutions
15,29 & 46
Re lated Art icle/
Schedu le
Name of th e Celse

Supre me Cou r t Jud ge me n t: It affirmed the
j udgement of the Madras High Court. It struck
down t he order issued by t he Ma dras Govern ment ( known as the Co mm unal GO) that had
provid ed for the proport io nate rese rvat ion of
smits in the gove rn me nt med ica l an d e n g i ~
nee ri ng coll eges for d ifferent commu ni ties
with t he object of promot ing the educatio nal
inte rest of t he bac kward classes un de r Arti cl e
46. It he ld lhat t he comm un a l GO wa s based
011 rel ig io n , race and caste a nd hen ce wa s
vio la ti ve of Art icles J5( 1) a nd 29(2). Fu rther, it declared lhat the direc tive pri nc iples
ca n not in any way ove rr ide or ab ridge the
funda me n tal righ ts. It a lso stated t hat t he
directi ve prin c iples have to co nform to and
run as subs idi ary to t he fund a me n tal ri ghts.
Impact o f th e Judge me nt: T hi s judge me n t
led to th e i nse rt ion of a new Cla use (4) in
Art icle 15 by t he 1st Ame ndm e nt Act ( 1951).
Thi s clause perm its the state to make a ny
spec ial prov isio n for the advclllce mellt of any
soc ia ll y a nd ed ucat iona ll y ba c kwa rd classes
of citizens or for the SCs and STh. [n th is way,
t he e ffec t of this judgemen t wa s nulli fie d.

t SHANKARI PRASAD CASE (1951)
Na me of t he Case

: Shan kar i Prasad vs.
Union of Ind ia
Year of Judge me n t: ] 95 ]
Po pu lar Na me
Pa rl iam e nt's power to
Re la ted Th p ic/
Iss ue
ame nd the co nstitut ion
Rela LCd Art icle/
13 & 368
Sc hedu le

Landmark Judgements and Their Impart

Supreme Court Judgeme nt: It h eld that the
p arli am en t's ame ndin g power under Article
368 al so inc1ud es the power to a m end the
fu nda mental ri ghts gu a ranteed in Part III
of the Con stituti o n . Furth er, it sa id that a
co n stitution al am endm e nt act en acted to
a br idge or take away th e funda m en ta l rights
is not vo id under Arti cle 13(2). Therefo re,
th e co urt uph eld th e va lidit y of th e 1st
Amendm ent Act (1951 ), which curta il ed th e
ri ght to property by inse rtin g Articles 31A
and 31B.
Impac t of the Judge m ent: In thi s judgement, th e Suprem e Co urt m ade a di stin ctio n b etween th e legislati ve law (ord inary
law) an d the con stitu ent law (co n stitutional
a mendm e nt law). In oth e r words, th e co u rt
has se pa rated th e. ord in ar y leg islati ve power
of th e Pa rliam ent from that of its co n stituent p owe r. It he ld th at th e word ' law' in
Article 13(2) refer s to a n ordin a ry law and
do es n ot inc1ud e a con stitu ent law mad e
under Art icl e 368. Hen ce, it la id down tha t
th e Pa rli am en t ca n a mend any provision
of the constitution a nd rejected th e view
th a t th e Funda men ta l Ri gh ts are in violabl e.
Thi s judge m en t h eld th e fi eld for on e and
h alf decade ( 1951 to 1967 ), The Sup rem e
Court re-a ffir m ed th e ab ove judge m ent in
th e Sajja n Singh easel ( 1964). But the court
overruled th e ab ove stand in th e Go la k Nath
case' ( 1967),

~ BERUBARI UNION CASE (1960)
Na me of th e
Case
Year of
J udgemen t
Popular Nam e

Berubari Un io n vs.
Unkn ownS
1960

JSajja n Singh vs. State ofRajast/1a1t ( 1964).
,
4. .c. Golak Na th vs. State of Punjab ( 1967).

sReference by the PIe$ident of India under Article
143 of the constitution on the im plementation of
the Indo-Pak Agree ment of 1958, relating to Berubari
Union and Exchange ofCooch-Behar Enclaves (1960).

~ 625

Related '!bpic/ : Cess ion of Indian
Issue
Territor y to a fore ign state
Related Article/ : 3, 368 & First Schedule
Sch edule
Supreme Court Judgement: It ruled that the
power of Parliament under Article 3 to dimin ish th e a rea of a state does n ot cover cession
of In dian territory to a fore ign country. It
stated that Arti cle 3 dea ls with the interna l
adjustmen t in ter se of the territories of the
constituent states of the Indian Union. Hence,
India n territory can be ceded to a fo reign
state o nly by an a mendm ent of th e constitut ion under Arti cle 368, prov iding fo r th e
a lteration of the Fi rst Sch edul e. Fu rther, the
court h eld that the Preamble is not a part of
the co nstituti on .
Impact of the Judgement: Thi s judgem ent
led to th e enactm ent of the 9th Am endmen t
Act (1960). Th is am endmen t gave effect to
the tra n sfe r of certa in territory known as
Beruba ri Un ion (West Ben ga l) to Pakista n .
This tra n sfer was don e as per th e prov ision s
of Indo-Pak Agreem ent (NehrU-Noo n Agreemen t) of 1958, relating to Berubari Union and
Exch an ge of Coach-Behar En claves.

~ K ,M , NANAVATI CASE (1961)
Name of th e Case : K.M. Na navati vs.
State of Maharashtra
Yea r of Judgement : 1961
Popul ar Na m e
Rel ated '!b pi c/
J u ry System of trial
Issue
Related Articl e/
Sch edule
Supreme Court Judgement: It affirm ed the
judgement of th e Bo mbay High Court. It 1"!eld
tha t th e con victio n of the accused Nan avat i
under Secti on 302 o f th e Indian Pe nal Code
and the se nte nce of life imprisonmen t passed
on him by the High Court are co rrect. He was
awa rded the punish me nt for the murder of
hi s wife's pa ra mour.

626

:fY

I,d;o, Pol"r

Impact of the Judgement: This judgement
brought out the shortcomi ngs in the worki n g
of Jury System and led to its abolitio n. However, even after this case also, there were so me
cases of jury trial s in the country. Finall y, the
new Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 completely removed the syste m of trial by jury
in India. Further, the sentenced Nanavati,
after spe nding 3 yea rs in prison, was granted
pardon by the Governor.

~ I. C . GOLAK NATH CASE (1967)
Name of the Case

Year of Judgement
Popular Na me
Related Tbpic/
[S$ ue

Related Art icle /
Schedule

I.e. Go lak Nath vs.
State of Punjab
1967
Parliam e nt's power to
amend the co nstitution
13 & 368

Supreme Court Judgement: It overru led its
two ea rli er ve rdicts delivered in the Slumkari
Prasad case6 (1951) an d the Sajjan Sil1g11 case'
(1964). It held that the amend ing power
under Article 368 ca n not be used to abridge
or take away the funda menta l rights guaranteed in Part III of the constitution. Further, it
said that a constitutio na l amend m ent a ct is a
law within the mea ning of Article 13(2). But,
the court ruled that the 1st Amen dment Act
( 1951), the 4th Amendment Act ( 1955) and
the 17th Amendment Act ( 1964) will cont inue
to be va lid for th e future. In other words,
the Supreme Cou rt applied the doctrine of
prospective overruling and declared that this
judgement will have onl y prospective operation and not retrospective operation.
Impact of the Judgement: As a sequel to this
judgement, the 24th Amendment Act (1971 )
was e na cted. This amendment provided
that the Parliament ha s the power to amend
a ny part of the constitution incl udin g the
fundamental rights in accordance with the

,!

6Shal1ka"'; Pmsaci vs. v ,zioll of IIldia ( 1951).
' Sajjwl Singh vs. Srate of Rajastha/1 964).

procedure laid down in Article 36B. It a lso
provid ed that a con stitution a l amendment
act will not b e a law within the meaning
of Article 13(2). Thus, this amendment was
a im ed at overriding the above judgement.

j

KESAVANANDA BHARATI
CASE (1973)

Na me of the Case
Year of Judgement
Popular Nam e
Related Thpic/
Issue
Related Article/
Sch edu le

Kesavananda Bharati
vs, State of Ke rala
1973
Fundamenta l Rights
case
Parliament's powe r to
amend the consti tutio n
13 & 368

Supreme Court Judgement: It overru led its
earlier verdict delivered in th e Golak Nat11 cases
( 1967). It held that the Parliament, by exe rcising its co nstitue nt power under Artic1e 368, can
amend any or all the provisions of the Constitution including those relating to the fundamental righ ts, but except th e 'basic structure' of the
constitution, It upheld the validity of the 24th
Amendment Act ( 1971) which inserted Clau se
(4) in Article ]3 and Clause (3) in Article 368.
Further, the court held that Section s 2(a) a nd
2(b) of the 25th Am endment Act (1971) . s
valid, On the other hand, it declared the first
part of Section 3 of the 25th Amendmen t Act
(197]) as val id and the second part9 , as invalid.
Moreover, the court validated the 29th Amend·
ment Act ( 1971) .
Impact of the Judgement: This judgement
led to the emerge nce of the doctrin e of bas ic
structure of the co n stitution as a limitation
on the amending power of the Parliament.
The Supreme Co urt ha s app lied this doc·
trine in subsequ ent cases in examining and
8 1.C. Golak Natll

vs. State ofPwljab (1967),

~e second part stood as fo llows: "No law cant.1.ini ng

declaration that it is for giving effect to such
policy shall be ca lled in question in any court on
the ground that it does not give effect to such policy~.

Ii

Landmark judgements and Their Impact

deciding the validity of amendments to the
constitution. It also enlarged the list of elements of the basic structure in various cases.
Further, as a follow-up of this judgement, the
42nd Amendment Act (1976) gave the Parliament an unlimited and uncontrolled power
to amend the constitution. This is explained
below in the next case.

j CASE
INDIRA NEHRU GANDHI
(1975)
Name of the Case

Indira Nehru Gandhi
vs. Raj Narain
Year of Judgement
1975
Popular Name
Election case
Related Thpic/
: Basic structure of the
Issue
constitution
Related Article/
, 329A (Repealed)"
Schedule

•

Supreme Court Judgement: It reaffirmed
the applicability of the doctrine of basic
structure of the constitution. Accordingly, it
struck down clause (4) of Article 329A that
w'as inserted by the 39th Amendment Act
(1975). This provision had kept the election
disputes involving the Prime Minister and the
Speaker of Lok Sabh.1 outside the jurisdiction
of all courts. The Supreme Court held that this
provision was beyoTid the amending power of
the Parliament because it affected the basic
structure of the constitution.
Impact of the Judgement: Following the
above two judgements of the Supreme Court
in Kesavananda Bharati and Indira Nehru
Gandhi cases, the 42nd Amendment Act
(1976) inserted two new Clauses (4) and (5)
in Article 368. The Clause (4) provided that
an amendment of the Constitution (including
the provisions relating to the fundamental
rights) made under Article 368 shall not be
called in question in any court on any ground.
While the Clause (5) declared that there shall
9a Article 329A was repealed by the 44th Amendment
Act (1978). Earlier, it was inserted by the 39th
Amendment Act (1975).

~ 627

be no limitation whatever on the constituent
power of Parliament under Article 368. Thus,
it is c1ear that these two Clauses were inserted
in order to dilute the above doctrine of basic
structure that has been held to be a limitation
on the amending power of the Parliament.

~ A.D.M. JABALPUR CASE (1976)
Name of the Case

: A.n.M. Jabalpur vs.
Shivakant Shukla
Year of Judgement , 1976
Popular Name
: Habeas Corpus case
Related Thpic/
: Right to Bfe and perIssue
sonal1iberty during
the emergency
Related Article/
, 21 & 359
Schedule
Supreme Court Judgement: It he1d that
Artic1e 21 is the sole repository of the right to
life and personal liberty against the state. If
the enforcement of that right is suspended by a
Presidential Order under Artic1e 359, then the
detenu will have no locus standi to a writ petition for challenging the legality of his detention. In view of the Presidential Order dated
27th June 1975, no person has any locus standi
to move any petition before a High Court
under Artic1e 226 for a writ of habeas corpus
or any other writ to challenge the legality of
a detention order on any ground. Accordingly,
the court upheld the constitutional validity of
Section 16A(9) of the Maintenance of Internal
Security Act (MISA), 1971.
Impact of the Judgement: In this case, the
Supreme Court took, a restrictive meaning of
right to Hfe and personal liberty under Article
21 and gave a seriously flawed judgement.
The court argued that any claim to a writ of
habeas corpus on any ground amounted to the
enforcement of the right to life and personal
liberty which had been suspended by the Presidential Order. Consequently, it failed to fulfill
its role as the defender and guarantor of the
fundamental rights of the citizens during the
period of emergency (1975-77). Later, the 44th
Amendment Act (1978) amended Artic1e 359 to

628

,(7 Indion Polity

the effect that the enforcement of the right to
life and pe rsonal liberty unde r Article 21 ca n
not be suspended by a Presidential Order. In
view of t hi s amendment, the judgement de l iv.
cred in this case is no longer a good law and
is left on ly of academic import.:'1tlce.

~ MANEKA GANDHI CASE (1978)
Name of the Case
Year of Judgement
Popular Name
Related Thpic / lssue
Relmcd Article/
Sc hedu le

Ma n e ka Gandhi vs.
Union of India

1978

Persona l Liberty case
Procedure established
by law

21

Su preme Co urt Judgement! It overruled
its earlier judgement delivered in the A.K.
lO
GopaJoll c.:'1se (1950). It decla.red sect ion 10(3)
(c) of the Passport Act (1967) as not violative of Articles 14, 19(1 )(a) or (g) a nd 21 and
he nce, valid. But, it laid down t he following
propositions: (a) Art icles ]4, ] 9 a nd 2 1 are
not mutuall y exclusive wh ich means that a
law depr iving a perso n of 'pe rso nal l iberty'
has not only to stand the test of Article 21
but it must a lso sta nd the test of Articles 14
and 19; (b) Th e express ion 'perso na l li berty'
in Article 21 is of the widest amplitude and it
cove rs a variety of rights wh ich go to co nstitute the perso na l liberty of a man and some of
them have been ra ised to the status of di sti net
fundamenta l rights and g iven additional p rotection under Article 19i (c) The right to li fe
under Article 21 includes a ll those aspects of
life which go to make a man's li fe meaningful,
co mplete and worth li ving. Further, the right
to 'live' is not merel y co nfine d to phys ica l
ex iste nce but it includes wit hin its ambit the
right to li ve with hum an dignitYi and (d) The
expressio n 'procedure estabHshed by law' in
Article 21 means that the procedure prescribed
by law must be just, fair and rea so nable and
not arbitrary, fancifu l or oppressive. In o rde r
that the procedure is just, fair and reasonab le,
10A.K. Gopafmr vs. Stare of Mall/·as ( 1950). T his casc is

popularly known as the Preventive Detention case.

the procedu re should confi rm to the prinCiples
of Unatural just ice n•
Impact of the Judgement: By taking a wider
interp retation of the Article 21, this judge•
ment led to th e following: ( i) It in trod uced
th e America n conce pt of 'due process of law'
in Indian judicial interpretation ; (ii) It firmly
establi shed the 'go lden triang le' rule i.e., interrelation of Articles 14, 19 and 2] ; and ( ii i) It
expanded the scope of Article 2] and paved the
way for declaring a number of rights as integra] part of Article 21 in the subsequent ca.ses.

~ BACHAN SINGH CASE (1980)
Na me of the Case
Year of Judgeme n t
Popu lar Na me
Related Thpic/
Issue
Related Article/
Sc hed ul e

B<lchan Singh vs. State
of Punjab
1980
Co nstitutional val idi ty
of death pcnalty
19 & 2l

Supreme Cou rt Judgement: It ru led that the
provision of death pena lty (capital punishment) in Section 302 of t he Indian Pena l Code,
as an alternative pu ni shment for murder, is
not unreaso nabl e. Hence, this provis ion does
not violate th e letter or the ethos of Article 19.
It stated that Article 19( 1) does not gua rantee
the act ivity of com mittin g a murder. Furth er,
it held t hat the prov ision of death penalty a lso
does not vio late Article 21. It observed thm
Article 2 ] recognises the right of the State to
deprive a person of hi s life or personal liberty
in a cco rdance with fair, just find reaso nable
procedure established by a valid law. However,
the co urt he ld that the dea t h penalty for murder should be a n exception rather tha n the
rule. It sa id that this pena lty must be co nfined
to the ' rarest of rate cases', whe n the alternati ve option is unquestionably foreclosed.
further, it sa id that while making the choice
of death pe na lty, the exceptional .lnd grave
c ircum sta nces of both the crim e as well as the
c rimina l should be taken into co ns ideratio n .
Impact of the Judgement: This judgement
led to the l<ly ing down of t hc doctri ne of

Landmark Judgements and Their Impact

'rarest of rare cases' fo r awarding the death
penalty. This doctrine influenced the later
judgements de1ivered by the Supreme Court
in various subsequent cases.

~ MINERVA MILLS CASE (1980)
Name of the Case
Year of Judgement
Popular Name
Related Thpic/
Issue
Related Article/
Schedule

Minerva Mills vs.
Union of India
1980
Basic structure of the
constitution
31C & 368

Supreme Court Judgement: It invalidated
Clauses (4) and (5) of Article 368 which were
inserted by the 42nd Amendment Act (1976).
Similarly, the amendment made to Article
31G by the 42nd Amendment Act (1976) was
also declared as unconstitutional. The Court
said that the above changes made by the 42nd
Amendment Act (1976) destroyed the basic
structure of the constitution. It held the limited
power of Parliament to amend the constitution,
judicial review and the harmony and balance
between fundamental rights and directive
principles as basic features of the constitution.
Impact of the Judgement: This judgement
has nullified the attempt to dilute the doctrine
of the basic structure by the 42nd Amendment
Act (1976). This amendment had conferred an
unlimited and uncontrol1ed amending power
on the Parliament. The Supreme Court held
that the Parliament cannot, under Article
368, expand its amending power so as to
acquire for itself the right to repeal or abrogate the constitution or to destroy its basic
features. Further, this amendment also gave
precedence to al1 directive principles over
the funda'm ental rights conferred by Articles
14, 19 and 3Ill. The Supreme ,Court, in this
regard, held that anything that destroys the
balance between the fundamental rights and
the directive principles will ipso facto destroy
31 was omitted from Part III by the 44th
Amendment Ac:;t (1978),

11 Article

,6 29

an essential element of the basic structure of
the constitution.

~ WAMAN RAO CASE (1980)
Name of the Case: Waman Rao vs. Union
of India
Year of Judge1980
ment
Popular Name
: Judicial review of the
Related Thpic/
ninth schedule
Issue
Related Article/ , 368 & Ninth Schedule
Schedule
Supreme Court Judgement: It held that all
the amendments to the constitution which
were made before 24 April 1973 (the date
on which the court delivered its verdict in
the Kesavananda Bharati case) and by which
the Ninth Schedule was amended from time
to time by the inclusion of various Acts and
Regulations therein are valid. But; all the
amendments made after 24 April 1973 are
open to challenge on the ground that they are
beyond the constituent power of the Parliament, since they damage the basic structure of
the Constitution. In other words, the various
amendments by which additions were made
to the Ninth Schedule after 24 April 1973 will
be valid only if they do not damage the basic
structure of the constitution.

~ SHAH BANO CASE (1985)
Name of the Case
Year of Judgement
Popular Name
Related Thpic/
Issue
Related Article/
Schedule

Mohd. Ahmed Khan
vs. Shah Bano
1985
Maintenance of a
divorced Muslim wife

Supreme Court Judgement: It upheld the
judgement of the High Court of Madhya
Pradesh. It ruled that a Muslim husband is
liable to pay maintenance to the divorced
wife beyond the period of iddat. It held
that Section 125 of the Code of Criminal

630 ;

Indian Polity

Procedure, 1973 is secular in characte r and
applies to all religions and co mmuniti es. 1t
said that thi s sectio n wou ld prevail over the
personal law, in case of a confJict betwee n the
two. It a lso sa id that Mahr (or dower) does
not absolve a Mus li m hu sba nd from payme nt
ofmailltenance to the divorced wife. Further,
it al so e mph asized that a uniform civil code
wi ll he lp the cause of nationa l integratio n by
rem oving disparate loya lties to laws which
have conflicting ideologies.
impact of' the Judgement: This judgement
led to th e enactment of a new law called
the Muslim Wo men (Protection of Rights
on Divorce) Act, 1986. Thi s Ac t overturned
the above judgement by allowing the payme nt ofmaintcmlOce to a divorced wife only
during the period of iddat. In Danial Lat"ifi
case l Z (2001), the Suprem e Court upheld the
co nstitutional va lidity of thi s Act but held
that a Musl im husband is liable to pay tJle
maintenance to the divorced wife even after
t he period of iddat.

t D.C. WADHWA CASE (1986)
Na me o f th e Case

Year of Judgement
Popular Name
Re la ted'Tbpi c/
iss ue
Related Article/
Sch edule

D.C. Wadhwa vs. Sta te
of Bihar
1986
Ordinan ce-making
powe r of the Gove rnor

213

Supreme Co urt Judgement: it pointed out
that betwee n 1967-J981, the Governor of Bihar
promulgated 256 ordinan ces and all t h ese
were kept in force for per iods ranging from
1 to 14 years by re-promulgation from time
to time. It held that th e except iona l power
under Articl e 2] 3 cannot be used as a substitute for t he law-mak ing power of the State
Leg islature. It ruled that such II practi ce wou ld
be a 'subversion of the democ rati c process'
and a 'fra ud on the co nstitution'. It opined
l20alliai ultifi vs. Union of India (2 001 ).

that the ordinance- making power is meant
for meeting 3 n extraordinary situation and
it cannot be a ll owed to be 'perve rted to serve
politi ca l ends'. Accordingly, it declared th e
re-promulgated Biha r Inte rm ediate Education
Cou nc il Ord inance, J 985 as un con stitutional
and inva lid.
Impact of the Judgement: This judge ment
clearly exposed the fa ct that the ordinancema king powe r ca n be misu sed by the executive govern me nt.

t M.C. MEHTA CASE (1986)
Na me of the Case

: M.C. Mehta vs. Union
of India
Year of Judgement : 1986
Popu lar Name
Ole um Gas Leak case
Related lbpicl
Power of the Supreme
Iss ue
Court to award co mpe nsation
Rela ted Article/
21 & 32
Sc hedul e
Supreme Court Judgement: It he ld that its
power und er Articl e 32 is not only injective
in a mbit, i.e., preventing th e infrin gement
of fundamenta l right but also remedial in
sco pe and providing re l ief against a breac h
of th e fundamenta l right already committed. It stated that its power to grant suc h
remedia l relief ma y include the powe r to
award compensation in approp ria te ca ses.
It c larifi ed t h at the in fri ngeme nt of t h e
fundamental right mu st be gross and patenr
i.e., in co ntrovertible and ex facie glaring. It
observed that th e insta n t app l ications for
compe nsation are for t he enforce me n t of
the fundam e ntal right to life enshrined in
Article 21 and he nce, t hey are maintainabl e
under Artic1e 32.
Impact of the Judgement: Thi s judgeme n t
led to th e expan sion of the ambit of Env ironmental Law in the country. It introdu ced the
new prin ci ple of abso lute liability (no.fa ult
li a b il ity) in th e place of the earlier principle
of stri c t liabili ty.

Landmark Judgements and Their Impact

t KIHOTO HOllO HAN CASE (1992)
Name of the Case

: Kihoto Hallohan vs.
Zachillhu
Year of Judgement: 1992
Popular Name
Defection case
Validity of antiRelated !bpief
Issue
defection law
368 & Tenth Schedule
Related Article/
Schedule

Supreme Court Judgement: It declared
paragraph 7 of the Thnth Schedule (which
was inserted by the 52nd Amendment Act,
1985) as unconstitutional for violating the
provision under Article 368(2). It held that
pan graph 7 required to be ratified by at least
half of the State Legislatures for excluding
the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under
Artic1e 136 and the High Courts under Article
226. However, the court upheld the validity
of the remaining part of the Thnth Schedule:

t INORA SAWHNEY CASE (1992)
Name of the Case : Indra Sawhney vs.
Un ion of India
Year of Judgement: 1992
Popula r Name
MandaI case
Related Thpic/
Reservation for OBCs
Issue
in government jobs
Related Article!
16
Schedule
Supreme Court ·Judgement: It upheld the
validity of the impugned executive order which
provided 27% reservation of jobs to the OBCs
under the prov.ision of Article 16(4), with certain conditions like exclusion of creamy layer,
no reservation in promotions, m'a ximum reservation should not exceed 50%, ceiling of 50% on
reservation in backlog vacancies, no relaxation
in qualifying marks for promotions and so
on. On the other hand, it invalidated another
impugned executive order which provided
10% additional reservation of jobs for other
economically backward sections who arc not
covered by any existing schemes of reservation.
Impact of the Judgement: This judgement
led to the following: (i) Appointment of the

~ 631

Ram Nandan Committee to identify the creamy
layer among the OBCs; (li) Establishment of
the statutory National Commission for BCS l3
to examine the complaints of under-inclusion,
over-indusion or non-inclusion of any class of
citizens in the list ofBCs; and (iii) Enactment of
five amendment acts, namely, the 76th Amendment Act, 1994 that has placed the 13mi] Nadu
reservation act in the Ninth Schedule; the 77th
Amendment Act, 1995 that has nullified the
ruling with regard to reservation in promotions;
the 81st Amel!dment Act, 2000 that. has nullified
the ruling with regard to backJog vacancies; the
82nd Amendment Act, 2000 that has provided
for relaxations in qualifying marks and standards of evaluation in matters of reservat~on
in promotions; and the 85th Amendment Act,
2001 that has provided for consequential seniority in matters of promotion by virtue of rule of
reservation for the SCs and SIS.

t MOHINI JAIN CASE (1992)
Name of the Case : Mohini Jain vs. State
of Karnataka
Year of Judgement: 1992
Capitation Fee case
Popular Name
rught to education
Related Thpic!
Issue
21 & 41
Related Article/
Schedule
Supreme Court Judgement: It ruled that
the right to education is a fundamental right
under Article 21. In fact, it declared that this
right extends up to any level including the
professional education like engineering and
medicine. It observed that the right to life under
Article 21 and the dignity of an individual cannot be assured unless it is accompanied by the
right to education. It argued that without making right to education under Article 4] a reality,
the fundamental rights enshrined under Part 1II
13 Later, the 102nd Amendment Act, 2018 conferred

a constitutional status on the commission and
also enlarged its functions. For this purpose, the
amendment inserted a new Article 338-8 in the
constitution.

632

P

Indian Polity

sha ll rcnwin beyond the reach of the large
majori ty which is illiterate. It thus declared
that the right to education is concomita nt to the
fundamental rights. It furtJlcr observed that the
state is under a constitutional mandate to provide educational in sti tutions at all levels for the
benefit of the citi zens. It declared that cha rging cap itation fee for admiss ion amounted to
a pate nt denial of a citizen's right to education
and is wholly arbitrary and as such violative
of Article J 4. It described the capitation fee
as nothing but a price for selling education. It
opined that the concept of "teaching shop s~ is
co ntrary to the constitutional scheme.
Impact of the Judgement: This judgement
formed the ba sis for the later judgement
delivered by the Supreme COUlt in the Unll ;
KYis11110n case l4 (1993) that led to the passin g
of tile 86th Amendment Act (2002). In this case,
the Supreme Court was asked to examine the
correctness of the Mohin; Jain's judgemen t. The
petitioners co ntended that if the Mollini jain's
judgement was followed by the state governments, they wou ld have to close down their
engineering and medi ca l co ll eges. In this later
judgeme nt, the Supreme Co urt party upheld
and partly overruled the Mohin; jain 's judgement. T his is explained below in the next case.

~ UNNI KRISHNAN CASE (1993)
Na me of the Case
Year of Judgement
Popular Na me
Related Thpic/ lssue
Related Article/
Schedule

Unni Krishnan vs.
State of A.P.
1993

Right to education
21 & 45

Supreme Court Judgement: It held that the
right to education is a fundamenta l right
under Article 21 and that this right directly
flows from the right to life. But, it declared
that on ly children have right to free education
until they complete the age of 14 years. After
that age, the obligation of the sta te to provide
education depends on its economic capacity
14 Ulllli Kris/lIlall \'S. State of A. P. ( 1993).

and development. The cou rt also 5.:1. id that the
state is obliged to follow directions conta ined
in Article 45 whi ch originally (prior to its
amendment in 2002) provided for free and compulsory education for a ll children upto the age
of 14 years. The Article 21 is to be construed in
the light of Artic les 4 L, 45 and 46 contai ned in
Part IV dea ling with the Direct.ive Principles of
State Poli cy. The obligations cre.:1.ted by Articles
41, 45 and 46 can be discharged by the state
e ither by establishing its own in stitutions or
by aiding, recognising or granting affil iatio n
to private educatio nal institutions. Further, the
court held that the private unaided educational
in stitutions running professional courses like
engineering and medical are entitled to charge
a higher fee than that of the government in stitution s. But such a fee cannot exceed the ceiHng
fixed in this regard and commercia li sation of
education is not permissible.
Impact of the Judgeme nt: Subseq uent to this
judgement, the 86th Amendment Act (2002 )
was passed. This amendment added a new
Article 21A which makes the right to education a n ind epe ndent funda menta l right. This
Article declares that the state sha ll provide
free and compulsory education to all children
of the age of six to fourteen years in such a
lUanner as the state lUay determine. Th give
effect to this Article, the Parliament enacted
th e Right of children to Free and Compul sory
Education (RTE) Act, 2009.

SUPREME COURT ADVOCATESON-RECORD ASSOCIATION
CASE (1993)
Na me of the
Case
Year of Judgement
Popular Name
Related Thpic/
Issue
Related Art icle/
Sched ule

Supre m e Court Advocateson-Reco rd Association vs.
Un ion of India

1993

Seco nd Judges case
Appointment of Supre me
Co urt and High Court
Judges
124 & 217

Landmark Judgemenrs and Their Impact

Supreme Court Judgement: It overruled its
ea rli er judge m e-nt deli vered in th e S. P. Gupta
case lS (1981 ) which is popul arl y known as
the First Judges case. It held that the judges
of the Supreme Court and High Courts sh all
b e a ppointed by th e President in accordan ce
with th e advice tendered by the Chief Justi ce
of India. Bu t the Chief Justi ce of India sh al1
tender such advice a fter taking into co n sideration the views of two of h is senior m ost
col1eagu es. This means that the court has
ch anged th e meaning of the word 'consultati on ' in Articles 124 (2) and 217( 1) to th at of
'con currence'. Furth er, it h eld that the seniormost judge of the Supreme Court should be
a ppo inted as the Chi ef Justice of India.
Impact of the Judgement: Consequent to
this judgement and al so th e Advi sory Opinion
tendered in the Third Judges ease l 6 (1998), a
Mem orandum o f Procedure for apPOintment
of judges to the Supre me Court and th e High
Courts was formulated, and is being foll owed
fo r appOintm ent. This procedure, in ve nted
by the judicia ry, is kn own as th e "colleg ium
sys tem ".

t S. R. BOMMAI CASE (1994)
Nam e of th e Case
Yea r of Judgement
Popular Name
Related Thpic/ Issue
Related Article/ Schedule

S. R. Bommai vs.
Un ion of India
1994
Presiden t's rule
356

Supreme Court Judgement: It upheld the
constitutional validity of the imposition of
Pres ident's rule under Article 356 in Madhya
Pradesh, Him ach al Pradesh and Raj asth a n
in 1992. On the other hand, it dec1ared the
imposition of President's Rule in Nagala nd
in 1988, Karnataka in 1989 and Meghal aya in
ISS. p' Gupta vs. Union of India (1981 ).

)

r
)

Ui

In Re-Presidential Reference (1998). The President
sought the Supreme Court's opinion (under Article
143) on certain doubts over the consul tation
process to be adopted by the Chief Justice of India
as stipulated in the Second Judges case (1993).

633

1991 as unconstitutional and inva lid. Further,
it la id down the fo llowing propositions with
respect to Article 356: (a) The validi ty of th e
proclamation issued by the President under
Articl e 356( 1) is subj ect to j udi cial revi ew;
(b) Burden lies on the Uni on Governm ent to
prove that the relevan t material ex isted to justify the proc1amation; (c) Artic1e 74(2) is not
a bar against the scrutiny of the materi al on
the basis of which the President had arri ved at
hi s satisfaction; Cd) If the proc1amation issued
by the President is h eld invalid, then n otwithstanding the fact that it is approved by both the
Houses of Parliament, it will be open for the
court to restore the Legislative Assembly and
the Ministry; and (e) Secularism is a part of the
basic structure of the constituti on and hen ce,
the anti-secular acts of a State Gove rnment
ca n lawfully be deem ed to be a ground for the
imposition of the President's Rule.

Impact of the Judgement: This judge ment
pl aced a check on the arbitra ry exercise of
power under Articl e 356 by the Centre for
the purpose of imposing President's Rule in
th e States.

t VISHAKA CASE (1997)

Na m e of the Case : Vishaka vs. Sta te of
Rajasth an
Yea r of Judgem ent : 1997
Popula r Nam e
Rela ted Thpic/
Sexual ha rassm en t of
wom en at workpl ace
Issue
15 & 21
Related Artic1el
Sch edul e
Supreme Court Judgem ent: It held that the
sexual harassment of wom en at the workplace
is a violati on o f Articles 15 and 21. It sa id
th at it is the duty of the employer o r oth er
responsi ble person in work-places or other
institutions, whether publi c or private, to prevent sex ual harassment of working wom en. It
gave detail ed direction s on th e subj ect, whose
guidelines are to be strictly observed by all
employees, public or private, until suitabl e
leg islati on is enacted o n the subject.

634 ,g7 Indian Polity
Impact of the Judgement: By laying down
a sct of guidelines (which ca me to be known
as the 'Vishaka Guidelines'), this judgement
filled the legislative vacuum on the subject. Till
this time, there was no domestic law to address
this issue except a few provisions o f the Indian
Penal Code. Later; the Se.xual Harassment of
Wom en at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition
.md RedressaI) Act, 2013 \Vas enacted to provide protection aga inst se.x ual harassment of
women a t workplace and for the preventio n and
redressa l of comp laints of sexual harassment.

~ VINEET NARAIN CASE (1997)
Name of the Case : Vin cet Na rai n vs.

Union of India
Year of Judgem e nt : J997
Jain Hawala case
Po pu lar Name
Re lated Tbp ic/
Autonomy a nd efficient
fun ctioning of CBI
Issue
Re lated Article/
Sc hedule

Supreme Court Judgement: It directed that
statutory status shou ld be confe rred upon the
Ce ntral Vigilance Commiss ion (CVC). it a lso
issued direc tions to make the Ce ntral Burea u
of In vestigation (CBI) an autonomous body so
that it can function effective ly and e fficientl y
and is "iewed as a non-parti sa n age n cy. It
issued the simi lar directio ns with respect to
the Enforcement Directorate (ED). Furthe r, it
also struc k down the va lidity of the arbitrary
p rovis ion of Single Directive that required
the CB I to obtain the prior perm iss ion of the
Ce ntral Government before conducting an
investigation against the offi cers of the rank
of Jo int Secretary and above.
Impact of the Judgement: This judgement
led to the e nactment of the CVC Act, 2003
that confe rred the Statutory Status upon the
CVC. Under this Act, the supe rintende nce of
the CBI in so far as it relates to the investigati on of co rruption cases has been vested in
th e CVC. Further, t hi s Act also rei nsta ted the
prov ision of Single Direct ive that was again
decl<lred in va lid by the Supreme Court in 2014
on the ground that it is violative of Article 14.

ASSOCIATION FOR DEMOCRATIC
REFORMS CASE (2002)
Na me of the Case
Year of Judge me nt
Popular Na me
Related Thp ic/ Issue
Related Article/
Sched ul e

Union of Indi a vs.
Association for
Democratic Re form s
2002
Poll Reforms case
Criminali za tion of
po li tics
19

Supreme Co u rt J u dgemen t: It h e ld that a
vote r has a right to know about the antecedents including c riminal pa st of h is ca nd idate
as part of his right under Article 19(1)(a) i. c.,
freedom of sp eech a nd expression. Voter's
speech or expression incase of election would
in cl ude casti ng of votes, that is to say vote r
speaks o ut or ex presses by casti ng vote. For
this purpose, information about the cand ida te
to be se lected is a must. De mocracy Cc:1.nnot
survive without free a nd fa ir elections, without
free and fairly informed voters. Therefore, the
courtdirccted the Election Commission to make
it manclatory for the ca ndidates to furnish information on the followin g aspects: (a) Whethe r
the candidate is co nvicted/ acquitted/ d.ischarged
of any crimina l offence in the past - if any,
whether he is punished with impriso nment or
fine; (b) Prior to six months of filing of nomination, whether the candidate is accused in any
pe nding case, of any offence punishable with
imprisonment for two years or more, and in
wh ich charge is framed or cognizance is taken
by the court of law. If so, the details thereof;
(c) The assets (immovablt; movable, bank balance, etc.) of a Cc:1.ndidate and of hislher spouse
a nd that of depe ndents; (d) Liabilities, if any,
particularly whether there are any over dues of
any publi c financial institution or government
dues; a nd (e) The educational qualifications of
the candidate.
Impact of the Judgemen t: As a sequel to this
judgement, the Elect io n Commi ss ion issued
in Z003 an orcle rl 7 directing every ca ndidate
"Orderdatcd March 27, 2003.

Landmark Judgements

seeking election to the Parliament or a State
Legislature to furnish on his nomination paper
the information on the above (a) to (e) matters.
Furnishing of any false information in the affidavit is now an electoral offence.

T.M.A. PAl FOUNDATION
CASE (2002)
Name of the Case
Year of Judgement
Popular Name
Related Thpic/lssue
Related Article/
Schedule

)

,

\

: T.M.A. Pai Foundation
vs. State of Karnataka
2002
Rights of minority educational institutions
29 & 30

Supreme Court Judgement: It laid down the
following propositions with respect to the rights
-of and the permissible restrictions upon minority educational institutions (both aided and
unaided): (a) Linguistic and religious minorities are covered by the expression "minorityn
under Article 30. Since reorganization of the
states in India has been on linguistic lines,
therefore, for the purpose of determining the
minOrity, the unit '\\';11 be the State and not the
whqle of India. Thus, religious and linguistic
minorities, who have.been put at par in Article
30, have to be considered state-wise; (b) Article
30(:.1) gives religious and Jinguistic minorities
the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice. The use of
the words "of their choice" indicates that even
professional educational institutions would be
covered by Article 30; (c) Admission of students
to unaided minority educational institutions,
cannot be regulated by the State government or
the university (except for providing the qualifications and minimum conditions of eligibility
in the interest of academic standards); (d) The
ri'ght to administer, not being an absolute one,
there could be regulatory measures for ensuring
educational standards and maintaining excellence thereof; (e) The moment aid is received
by a minority educational institution, it would
be governed by Article 29(2) and would then
not be able to refuse admission on grounds of

a~d Their Impact ~ 635

religion, race, caste, language or any of them.
In other words, it cannot then give preference
to students of its own community; Cf) In the
case of aided professional institutions, it can
also be stipulated that passing of common
entrance test held by the state agency is nec·
essary to seek admission; and (g) A minority
institution may have its own procedure and
method of admission as well as selection of
students, but such procedure must be fair and
transparent and selection of students in professional and higher educational colleges should
be on the basis of merit.
Impact of the Judgement: In order. to overcome the effect of this judgement and also
the judgement delivered in the 1l1amdar case lS
(2005), the 93rd Amendment Act (2005) was
enacted. This amendment inserted a new
Clause {s) in Article 15. This clause empowered the state to make any special provision
for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for
the scheduled castes or the scheduled tribes
regarding their admission to educational
institutions. This provision also includes private educational institutions, whether aided
or unaided by the state, except the minority
educational institutions under Article 30(1).

t NAVEEN JINDAL CASE (2004)
Name of the Case : Union of India vs.
Naveen Jindal
Year of Judgement: 2004
Popular Name
Related Thpic/
Right to fly the
Issue
national flag
19
Related Article/
Schedule
Supreme Court Judgement: It held that
the right to fly the national flag freely with
respect and dignity is a fundamental right
of a citizen within the meaning of the freedom of speech and expression guaranteed by
Article 19(1)(a). This right is an expression
18p'A. 1l1amdar vs. State of Maliaras1Ttra (2005).

636

P

Indian Polity

and manifestat io n of a c itize n 's all eg ia nce
and fee lin gs a nd se n t im e nts of pr id e for t he
na tio n . However, it ca n no t be used fo r co m m e rc ia l purpose or ot herw ise.

t PRAKASH SINGH CASE (2006)
Nam e of the Case
Yea r of J udge m e n t
Popular Na m e
Re la ted Thp ic!Issue
Rela ted Art icle!
Schedul e

Prakash Singh vs.
Un io n o f Indi a
2006
Po li ce refo rm s

Supreme Court Judge ment: It iss ued seve n
d irect ives to the ce n t ra l govern m e n t, state
govern men ts a nd uni on territories a im ed at
brin gi ng in police refo rm s to ensu re th a t the
po li ce ma chin ery fun ctio ns witho ut a ny politica l in terfere nce. These are: ( i) co nstitutio n of
a State Secu r ity Com m iss io n ; ( ii) Selectio n of
the DGP fro m a mon gst the th ree se ni or-m ost
officers e mpan ell ed by the UPSC for th e post
and a min imu m te nu re of two yea rs fo r the
DGp, (iii ) a m ini mum te nure of two years a lso
for the po li ce officers o n o perat io nal dut ies,
(iv) sepa ratio n of the in vestiga tion po lice fro l11
the law and order po lice, (v) setti ng up a Po lice
Establishme nt Board, (vi) setting u p Po lice
Com pl a in ts Aut ho ri ty a t sta te a n d di str ict
levels, a nd ( vii) setting lip a Natio nal Security
co mmi ss io n a t the ce ntra l level.
Impac t o f th e Judge m e nt: T his judge m ent
led to th e in trodu ct ion of po li ce refo r ms in
the coun t ry but o nl y partiall y a nd not full y.
Also, it co ul d no t e l i mi na te t he pol it ica l
interfere nce in th e fu nct ion in g of the po li ce
syste m , espec ia lly in t he post in gs a n d tra n sfe rs. Alt hough Sta te Secur ity Co mm iss io ns
a nd Po li ce Estab li shm e nt Boards have been
set-up in m ost of th e states, t hey a re not very
effec ti ve in t he i r fun ct io ning an d lac k t he
a ut ho r ity to make bin d in g reco mm e nda ti o ns.
However, in vari o us cases, th e I-l igh Co urts
have issued o rd ers ask in g th e state m en t gove rn me nts to compl y with the above d irecti ves
of the Sup re m e Co urt.

t M. NAGARAJ CASE (2006)
: M. Nagaraj vs. Un io n
o f Indi a
Year of Judge m ent 2006
Po pular Na m e
Related Thp ic!
Rese rva ti o n in pro moIss ue
t io ns fo r SCs a nd S15
16 & 335
Related Art icle!
Schedul e
Na me of the Case

Sup re m e Court Judge m e nt: It upheld the
con st itutio na l va lidity of th e 77th Am e n dme nt Act ( 1995) t he 81st Am end me n t Act
(2000) , th e 82 nd Amen dm e nt Act (2000) and
the 85th Am e ndm e nt Act (2001). It sa id that
t he imp ug ned Co nst itu ti o n a l Am e ndm e n t
Acts by wh ic h Art icle 16(4A) a n d Artic le
16(4B) have bee n inserted fl ow fro m Art icle
16(4). T hey do no t alte r the structu re of Article 16(4). T hey reta i n the co n tro lli ng facto rs
o r th e co mpe llin g reaso ns, n amely, backwardness a nd in adeq uacy of represe n tation which
e nable the Sta te to p rov ide for reservatio n
kee p ing in mi nd t he overa ll effic ie ncy of the
State admini stra tion under Art icl e 335. T hese
im pugned a m e ndm ents a re confin ed o nl y to
Schedul ed Castes a n d Schcdu led Tr ibes. T hey
do not oblite rate a ny of th e co nst itu t iona l
require m c nts, name ly, ce ilin g lim it o f 50%
(q ua ntita ti ve l i mita ti o n). th e conce p t of
crea m y laye r (qu a li tative excl usio n), the subcl ass ificat ion betwee n the OBCs o n t he o ne
ha nd an d t he SCs a n d th e STh o n the othe r
ha nd a s he ld i n t he lndra Sawlmey case l9
( 1992) an d the co nce pt of post-based roster
with inbu ilt concep t o f replace ment as held
i n th e R.K. Sabhaywa/ casc 20 ( 1995).

t I.R. COELHO CASE (2007)
Nam e of the Case
Yea r of Judge m e nt
Po pula r Na m e

I.R. Coe lho vs. State
of TIlInil Nad u
2007
Ni n t h Sc hed ul e case

191/1dm So.whl1cy vs. Union of India ( 1992). T hi s case
is popularly known as (he MandaI C<ISC.
20 R. K. SalJ[wYIII(1 1 vs. Stare of Punjab ( 1995).

I

Landmark judgements and Their Impact

Related /bpic/
Issue
Related Art icle/
Sch edule

judicial review of the
ninth schedu le
31 B & Ninth Schedul e

Supreme Court Judgement: It reaffirmed
its judgement
delivered in the Wamall Rao
2l
case ( 1980) . Therefore, it held that the
amendments to the Constitutio n made on
or after 24 April 1973 (i.e., the date ofverdiet in the Kesavananda Bllarati case 22 ) by
which th e Ninth Sc hedule is amended by
inclusion of various laws there in would be
open to challenge o n the ground that they
damage or destroy the basic s tructure of
the Constitution. In addition, it laid down
certain tests whic h are to be app li ed fo r
deciding the va lidi ty of those const itutional
amendments. The fundamen ta l question
before the COurt was whethe r on o r after 24
April 1973, when basic structure doctrine
was propounded, it is permissible for the
Parliament under Artic le 31 B to immuni ze
Jegisl(ltions from fund(lmentai rights by
inserting them into t h e Ninth Sc hedul e
and, if so, what is its effect on the power of
judicial review of the COurt.

ARUNARAMACHANDRA
SHANBAUG CASE (2011)
Name of the Case
Year of Judgement
Popular Name
Related /bpic/ lssue
Related Artic le/
Sched ule

Arun(l Rama chandra
Shanbaug vs. Unio n
of In dia
201l

Euthana s ia

21 Waman Rao vs. Unio n of India (1980).
vs. State of Kemla ( 1973 ) .
This case is popularly known as the Fundament.l1

Rights case.

laid down by the COurt: (i) A decision ha s to
be taken to discontinue life support e ither by
the parents or the spOuse or other close relatives, or in the absence of any of them, such a
decision can be taken even by a person acting
as a next fr iend or by the doctors attending
the patient; ( ii ) Even if a decision is taken by
the n ear relatives or doctors or next friend to
withdraw life support, such a decision requires
approva l from the High Cou rt con cerned; (ii i)
When such a n application is filed, the Chief
Justice of the High Court s hould forthwith
const itute a Bench of at least two Judges who
shou ld decide to grant approval or not. Before
doing so the Bench shou ld seek th e opinion
of a committee of three reputed doctors to be
nominated by the Bench; <l nd (iv) The High
Court Bench sha ll a lso issue notice to the
St.ate and close relatives e.g. parents, spouse,
brothers/s isters etc. of the patient, and in
their (lbsence his/ her next friend, and supp ly
a copy of the report of the doctor's committee
to them. After hearing th em, the High Co urt
bench should give its verdict.

PEOPLE'S UNION FOR CIVIL
LIBERTIES CASE (2013)
Na me of the Case

People's Union for
Civ il Liberties vs.
Unio n of India
Year of Judgement : 2013
Popular Name
NorA case
Related /bpie/ lssue ; Electora I reform s
Related Article/
14, 19 &2 ]
Sched ul e

21

Supreme Court ,Judgement: It held that
active eutha nasia and assisted death arc not
permissible and hen ce, cont inue to be ill ega l,
whereas passive euthanasia is permissible with
certa in co ndition s, safeguards a nd procedure
22Kesavwulllda Bll(lmti

637

Supreme Court Judgement: It held t hat
Rules 4 1(2) & (3) and 49-0 of the Cond uct
of Election Rules, 196] (whieh recognize the
rig ht of a voter not to vote) arc ultra-vires
Sect ion 128 of th e Represe n tation of the
People Act, 1951 and Article 19(J)(a) of the
Co nstitution to tIle extent they violate secrecy
of voting. Therefore, it directed the Electio n
Commission to provide necessary provision
in the ballot papers/ EVMs and another button ca ll ed ~None of the Above" (NOTA) may
be provided in EVMs so that the voters, who

638

f?

Indian Polity

come to the polling booth and decide not to
vote for any of the candidates in the fray,
are able to exercise their right not to vote
while maintaining their right of secrecy. The
court made the following obsen'ations: (i) In
order to protect the right in terms of Section
79(d) and Rule 49-0, viz., "right not to vote n ,
this court is competent to issue directions
that secrecy of a voter who decides not to cast
his vote has to be protected in the same manner as the Statute has protected the right of
a voter who decides to cast his vote in favour
of a candidate; (ii) This court is also justified in giving such directions in order to give
effect to the right of expression under Article
19(1 )(a) and to avoid any discrimination by
directing the Election Commission to provide
NOTA button in the EVM s; (iii) Article 19
guarantees a11 individuals the right to speak,
criticize, and disagree on a particular issue.
It stands on the spirit of tolerance and allows
people to have diverse views, ideas and ideologies. Not a110wing a person to cast vote negatively defeats the very freedom of expression
and the right ensured in Article 21 Le., the
right to Jiberty; and (iv) Protection of elector's identity and affording secrecy is integral
to free and fair elections and an arbitrary
distinction between the voter who casts his
vote and the voter who does not cast his vote
is violative of Article, 14.

t LILY THOMAS CASE (2013)
Name of the Case
Year of J udgemen t
Popular Name
Related 'Ibpic/Issue
Related Article/Schedule

: Lily Thomas vs.
Union of India
2013

Criminalization
of politics
102 & 191

Supreme Court Judgement: It held that the
members of the Parliament and the State legislatures, who have been convicted for offences,
wiUloose their membership of the House immediately (i.e., the disqualification takes place
from the date of conviction). [t struck down
Section B(4) of the Representation of the People
Act, 1951 and declared the same as unconstitutionaL Under this Section, the con.victed members of the Parliament and the State Legislatures
are given three months time to appeal in the
higher court and get a stay on their conviction
and sentence by the trial court. The court ruled
that the Parliament does not have the power
under Articles 102 and 191 to make different
laws for a person to be disqualified for being
chosen as a member and for a person to be
disqualified for continuing as a member of the
Parliament or the State Legislature. Hence, fue
above Section B( 4), which carved out a saving
in the case of a sitting member from disquali..
fication, is beyond the powers conferred on the
Parliament and is ultra vires the constitution.

Impact of the Judgement: Subsequent to
this judgement, the Election Commission
made provision in the ballot papers/EVMs
for None of the Above (NorA) option. The
provision for NOTA has been made since
General Election to State Legislative Assemblies of Chhattisgarh, MP, Mizoram, NCT of
Delhi and Rajasthan in 2013 and continued
in the General Election to State Legislative
Assemblies of Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal
Pradesh, Odisha and Sikkim in 2014 along
with the General Elections to the Sixteenth '

t

23Electoral Statistics: Pocket Book 2015, Election
Commission of India, p. 96.

Name of the Case : T.S.R. Subramanian
vs. Union of India
Year of Judgement: 2013
Popular Name

Lok Sabha (2014)23.

Impact of the Judgement: This judgement
led to the immediate disqualification of a
number of convicted members of the Parliament and the State Legislatures. In order
to nullify this ruling of the Supreme Court,
the Representation of the People (Seco nd
Amendment and Validation) Bill, 2013 was
introduced in the Parliament. However, this
Bill was later withdrawn by the Government.

T.S. R. SUBRAMANIAN CASE (2013)

I

1,

,

j

'I

I

Landmark Judgements and Their Impact

Related Thpic!
Issue
Related Article!
Schedule

Civil service reforms

Supreme Court Judgement: It issued various
directions to the central government, state
governments and union territories aimed
at bringing in civil service reforms for the
effective, efficient and transparent admin·
istration as well as the accountability and
stability of civil servants. These are (i) con·
stitution of the Civil Service Boards to guide
and advice the governments on transfers,
postings, disciplinary action and other ser·
vice matters, (ii) providing a fixed minimum
tenure of service to various civil servants,
and (iii) mandating that the civil servants
should not act on the basis of verbal or oral
instructions, orders, suggestions, proposals
and directions and these should be in writing
and also formally recorded if given orally.
Impact of the Judgement: This judgement
led to the making of amendments in Rule 7
of the lAS, IPS and IFoS (Cadre) Rules vide
a notification issued in 2014. For the Central
Services, the respective Cadre Contro11ing
Authorities have been directed to implement
the above directions of the Supreme Court.
However, the Civil Service Boards in the
States!UTs are not functioning effectively.

NATIONAL LEGAL SERVICES
AUTHORITY CASE (2014)
Name of the Case : National Legal Services
Authority vs. Union of
India
Year of Judgement: 2014
Popular Name
Related Thpic!
Rights of transgender
Issue
persons
Related Article!
14 & 21
Schedule
Supreme Court Judgement: It declared
Transgenders along with Hijaras!Eunuchs
as 'third gender' and held that the funda·
mental rights granted under Part III of the

~ 639

constitution are equally applicable to them.
It also upheld Thansgender persons' right
to decide their self·identified gender and
directed the Central and State Governments to
grant legal recognition of their gender iden·
tity such as male, female or as third gender.
It also directed the Central and State
Governments to take steps to treat them as
socially and educationally backward classes
of citizens and extend all kinds of reserva·
tion in cases of admission in educational
institutions and for public appointments.
The court held that non·recognition of Trans·
gender denies them equal protection of law
under Article 14. If further held that Article
21 protects one's right of self·determination
of the gender to which a person belongs. In
other words, gender identify is integral to the
dignity of an individual and is at the core of
'personal autonomy' and 'self·determination'.
Impact of the Judgement: This judgement
led to the enactment of the Thansgender
Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019. The
objective of this act is to provide for protec·
tion of rights of transgender persons and
their welfare. This act prohibits discrimina·
tion against transgender persons and confers
right upon them to be recognized as such,
and a right to self·perceived gender identity.

~ SHREYA SINGHAL CASE (2015)
Name of the Case

Shreya Singhal vs.
Union of India

Year of Judgement 2015
Popular Name
Related Thpic/
Restrictions on online
Issue
speech
, 19
Related Article!
Schedule
Supreme Court Judgement: It struck down
section 66A of the Information Technology
Act (2000), which provides punishment for
sending offensive messages by any person
through a computer resource or a communi·
cation device. It held that the section in its
entirety is violative of the freedom of speech

640

,( f Indian Polfry

and expressio n guaranteed under Artic1e
19(1)(a). It furth er held that t he sect ion is
not saved by Artic1e 19(2) as it creates an
offence wh ich is vague and over·broad. It a lso
held that the wider range of circul ation over
the internet cannot restrict the co ntent of the
right under Article 19(1)(a) no r can it justi fy
the denial of that right.

SUPREME COURT ADVOCATESON-RECORD ASSOCIATION
CASE (2015)
Na me of the Case

Year of Judgement
Popular Name
Related'Ibpi c/
Issue
Related Article/
Schedu le

Supreme Cou rt
Advocates-o n·Record
Associa t ion vs. Un ion
of In d ia
2015
Fourth Judges case or
NJAC case
f\ppointm ent of
Sup reme Co urt a nd
Hi gh Cou rt Judges
124 & 217

Supreme Court Judgeme nt: It declared the
99t h Ame ndment Act (20 14) as unconstitu·
tional and void on the ground that it affects
the indepe nd ence of judicia ry wh ich is one
of t he com ponents of th e basic structu re of
the co nstitution. It a lso declared the National
Judicial Appointments Co mmission Act
(201 4) as un con stituti ona l and voi d. Further,
it declared the earlier 'co llegium system'
of appointment of judges to the Supreme
Court and the High Cou rts to be o perative. It
o rdered to list the case to cons ider in troductio n of appropriate measures, if a ny, for an
improved worki ng of the 'collegium system '.
Impac t of the J udge m e nt: Conseque nt to
this judgement, both the 99th Amendment
Act (2014) as well as the Natio n a l Judi·
c ia l Appo intm e nts Co mmission Act (20]4 )
beca me inva1id. T herefo re, the earlier col·
legiu m syste m of appointment of judges to
the Supreme Court and the High Co urts was
resto red.

t SHAYARA BANO CASE (2017)
Name of the Case : Shayara Bano vs. Union
of India
Year of Judge me nt : 2017
Popul ar Na me
: 1tiple Thlaq case
Related Thp ic/
Divorce in the mu slim
co mmunity
Issue
Related Article/
14
Schedu le
Supreme Court Judgement: It declared triple
ta laq i.e., 'talaq-c-biddat' (the Muslim practice
that allows men to instantly divorce their wives)
as unconstitutio nal. It held that th is fo nn of
talaq is manifestly arbitrary in the sense that
the marita l tie ca n be broken capriciously
a nd whimsica ll y by a muslim man without
a ny attempt at recon ciliation so as to save it.
Therefore, the court held tlli s form of talaq to
be violative ofthe fundam e ntal right contained
under Articl e 14 of the Constitutio n. Si mila rly,
it declared Section 2 of the Mus lim Personal
Law (Shariat) App lication Act, 1937, as void to
the extent that it recognizes a nd enforces triple
talaq. Further, it ruled that t riple ta laq is agai nst
the basic tenets of the Holy Quran and what is
held to be bad in the Holy Quran, can not be
good in Shariat and, in that sense, what is bad
in theology is bad in law as well. Moreover, the
court d irected the central government to m<lke
a law \\rithin six months to govern divorce in the
muslim commu ni ty. Till then, an inju n ctio n
order of the court agai nst the pronouncement
of triple t<11aq would be in force.
Impac t of thc Judgeme nt: Thi s judgement
led to the enactment of the Muslim Wom en
(Protectio n of Rights o n Marriage) Act, 2019.
This act is popularly k nown as th e 'Triple
Th laq Act. It protects the rights of married
Muslim wo m en and prohibits divorce by pronounc in g talaq by their h usbands.

t K.S. PUTTASWAMY CASE (2017)
Name of th e Case

: K.S. Puttaswamy vs.
Unio n of India
Year of Judgement: 2017
Popular Na me
Right to privacy case

Landmark judgements and Their Impact

Funda menta l right to
privacy

Relate d Thpic /
issue
Related Art icle/
Schedul e

21

,

,

Supre me Court Judge ment: It dec1ared right
to privacy as a funda menta l right. It rul ed that
right to privacy is protec ted as an intrin sic
part of right to life and perso nalhb erty under
Article 2] and as a part of the freedoms guaranteed by Part III of the Const itution. It sa id
that privacy safeguards indivi dual auton omy
and recogn izes the ability of the individual to
contro l vital aspects of his life. However, it also
stated that the right to privac y is n ot an absolute right and h en ce, is subjec t to reason able
restric tio ns which are placed on funda menta l
freedo ms under Part III of the Const itution .
This means that a law which encro aches upon
privacy will have to withst and the touch stone
of permi ssible restric tions on funda menta l
freedo ms. In the context of Article 2], an invasion of privacy mu st be justifi ed on the basis
of a law which stipul ates a proced ure which
is fair, just and reasonable. The law must also
be valid with reference to the encroa ch ment
on life and person al liberty under Article 21.
An invasi on of life or person al liberty must
meet the three-fold requir ement of: (i) legality, which sti pulate s th e existe nce of law; (li)
need, defin ed in terms of a leg itimate state
aim ; and (iii) propo rtiona lity, which ensures
a ration al nexus between the objects and the
means adopted to achieve them.
Impac t of the Judge ment: This judge ment
over-ruled the two ea rlier judgem ents delive red
in M.P. Sharm a case24 (1954) and K1wrak Singh
case25 (1962) . In both the cases, the Supre me
Court had held that the r ight to privac y is not
protec ted by the Con stituti on. This judgem ent
a~so clarifi ed that the variou s judge ments
subseq uent to Khara k Singh, which have recognize d the fund am enta l right to privacy, lay
dow;n the co rrect positi on of law. Fu rther, this
judge ment influe nced the later judge ments
delive red by the Supre me Court in I ndian
M.p' Shanna vs. Satish Chandra (1954).
15 K1Jarak Singh vs. State of U.P. ( 1962).

24

~ 641

26
Young Lawyers Association case (2018) , Joseph
28
27
S11ine case (201 8), Navtej Singh Johar case
(2018) and other cases.
Based o n this j udgem ent, the Su preme
Court delive red ( in 2018) a separa te judgement on the validi ty of Aadha ar law. This
judge ment is popul arly kn own as the Aadha ar
judge ment or Puttas wamy -ll j udgem ent. In
th is judge ment, the Supre me Court upheld
th e co nstitu tional va lidity of the Aa dhaar
(Th rgeted Delive ry of Finan cial and Other
Subsidi es, Benef its an d Servic es) Act, 201 6. It
ruled that the requir ement under the Aadha ar
Act to give one's demographi c and biome tric
inform ation does not viol ate the funda menta l
right of privacy. It said that the Aadha ar Act
does not create an archit ecture for pervas ive
surve ill ance and provid es protec tion and
safety of the data received from indivi duals. However, the court struck down certai n
provis ions of the Act and suggested ch anges.
Accordingly, the Aadha ar and Other Laws
(A mend ment) Act, 2019 was enacte d.

1

INDI AN YOU NG LAWYERS
ASSO CIAT ION CASE (2018)

Na me of the Case

Indian Young Lawye rs
Assoc iation vs. State
of kerala

Year of Judge ment : 2018
Sabar imala case
Popu lar Na me
Wome n' s entry into
Related Thpic /
Sabari mala templ e
Issue
14, 21 & 25
Relate d Articl e/
Sched ule

Su preme Court Judge ment: It held that the
wome n of all ages ca n enter into the Sabarimal
templ e and worship Lord Ayyappa. It decla red
that the ban on the entry of wome n of the
age group of 10-50 years into the temple, is
uncon stituti on al. It held that the ban violat es
the right to equali ty under Articl e 14, the
Young Lawyers Association vs. State of
This case is popula rly known as the
(2018).
Kerala

16/ ndian

Sabarimala case.
17joseph Shine vs. Union of India (2018).
'l8Navtej Singh 1011ar vs. Union of India (2018).

642 ,(1' Indion Polity
right to pcrso nal1iberty under Article 21 a nd
the right to fre edom of religion under Article
25. Accordingly, it struck down Rule 3(h) of
the Kerala Hindu places of Publi c Worsh ip
(Au th o ri sation of Entry) Rul es, 1965 whi ch
prohibits the en try of women into the tem pl e.

Impact of the Judge ment: This judgeme nt
led to the protests a nd ha rta.ls by lakhs of devotees of Lord Ayyappa in Kera la. On the other
hand, some wom en made atte mpts to enter
the temple. But they faced strong resi sta nce
fro m the devotees as well as te mple priests and
authorities. However, there were so me successful atte mpts also. In November, 2019, th e fivejudge Sabarimala Review Be nch has referred
th is case to a large r be nch for adjudi cation.
Su bsequentl y, i:I nine-judge Be nch was con st ituted to conduct the hearin g on thi s reference.

t JOSEPH SHINE CASE (2018)
Na me of t he Case

Yea r of Judgement
Popular Name
Re lated lbpic/
Issue
Related Article/
Sch edul e

Jose ph Shin e vs. Union
of India
2018

Decriminalisa tion of
adul tery
14, 15&21

Supreme Court Judgement: It decrim inalised
adu ltery and struck down sect ion 497 of the
Indian Pena l Code. It decla red that thi s section
dealing with th e criminali zatio n of adulte ry,
is un co nstituti o na l. It held that thi s section
viola tes Arti cles 14, 15 a nd 21. Further, the
co urt decl a red that the Section 198(2) of t he
Code of Crimi na l Procedure, is a lso unconstitutional to the extent that it is ap plicabl e to
the offence of adultery. It observed t ha t wh en
the substantive provision goes, th e procedural
provisi on h<.ls to pave the sam e path.
Impact of the Judgement: Th is j udgement
has overrul ed a ll the previ ous judgements
which had uph eld th e above Sectio n 497 as
constitutionall y valid. After thi s judgemem,
a dultery is n o lon ger a c rimin a l offe n ce

attract in g up to 5 years' imp risonment. However, it ca n be co nsidered as a civil wro ng a nd
it is a g ro und for the di sso lution of marriage.

t

NAVTEJ SINGH JOHAR
CASE (2018)

Name of th e Case
Yea r of Judgement
Popular Na me
Related Thpi c! Issue
Related Article!
Schedul e

Navtej Singh Johar
vs. Un ion of Ind ia
2018
Dec riminalisation
of ho mosex uality
14, 15, 19 & 21

Supreme Co urt Judgement: It decrimin a lized ho mosexuality an d partl y struck down
Sect io n 377 of the [ndian Pe na l Code which
c rimin a li zed ca rnal in tercourse aga in st the
o rder of na tu re. It h eld th at th is Section is
unconstitutiona l in so far as it criminali zes
co nse nsual sexua l acts of adults of the sa me
sex. It declared that this Section violates th e
rig ht to equality under Art icle 14, th e ri ght
to non-di scrimatio n und e r Art icl e 15, th e
right to freedo m of ex pressio n under Article
19( 1)(a) and the righl lo live a life of dignity
and pri vacy under Article 21. It sai d th at the
LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexua l .lnd transgender)
perso ns are e ntitl ed to the sa me fundamental
rights as others.
Impact of the .Judgement: Thi s judgeme n t
overrul ed the ea rlier judgement deli vered in
the Surcs11 Kumar Kou sllal case 29 (201 3). In
this case, t he Supreme Co urt had uph e ld th e
consti tutional va lidity of the above Section
377. Before this judgement, th e m embe rs of
th e LGBT' co mmunity were co mpe ll ed to live
a life full of fear of repri sa l and persecu tion.
Now, they a re lega lly pe rmitted to engage in
co nsen sua l sex ua l conduct. Notably, th e provisi ons of t he above Sect ion 377 will con tinue
to govern non-co nsen sual sex ua l acts against
a dults, a ll acts of carn a l in tercourse aga in st
mino rs and acts of bestia li ty.
29SHresll Kum(lr KOHsllal vs. Naz F'ol.llu fatlon (2 01 3).
j

Landmark Judgements and Their Impact

t M. SIDDIQ CASE (2019)

t ANURADHA BHASIN CASE (2020)

: M. Siddiq vs. Mahant
Suresh Oas
Year of Judgement: 2019
Popular Name
Ayodhya case
Related Thpic/
Ram Janmabhoomi·
J.ssue
Babri Masjid land
dispute
Related Article!
Schedule

Name of the Case

N~me of the Case

Supreme Court Judgement: It awarded the
entire 2.77 acres of the disputed land in Ayodhya to the deity Ram Lana virajman. 1t gave
the following directions: (i) It directed the
Centre to formulate a scheme for the settingup of a trust for the construction of a Ram
Mandir at the disputed site where the centuries-old Babri Masjid stood before its demolition in 1992; (ii) It directed the Centre and UP
government to allot an alternative 5 acres of
land to the UP Sunni Central Waqf Board at a
suitable prominent place in Ayodhya for the
construction of a mosque; (iii) It directed that
in framing the scheme for the setting·up of the
trust, an appropriate representation may be
given to the Nirmon i Akhara in such manner
as the Centre deems fit. The suit filed by the
Akhara claiming shebaiti rights has been held
to be barred by limitation and shall accordingly stand dismissed.

,

~ 643

Impact of the Judgement: This judgement
has put an end to the more than a century-old
dispute that has shook the communal harmony
dimension of the Indian society. Subsequent
to this judgement, the Centre announced the
fonnation of the Ayodhya temple trust called
as the Shri Ram Janmabhoomi Therth Kshetra.
Similarly, the UP government announced the
allocation of 5 acres of land to the UP Sunni
Central Waqf Board in Dhannipur, Ayodhya.
Further, this judgement has overturned the 2010
Allahabad High Court judgement. The High
Court had equally divided the disputed land
between the three parties, viz., one-third for Ram
Lana Virajman, one·third for UP Sunni Central
Waqf Board and one·third for Ninnohi Akhara.

: Anuradha Bhasin vs.
Union of India
Year of Judgement: 2020
Popular Name
Related lbpic/
Suspension of internet
services
Issue
19
Related Article/
Schedule
Supreme Co.urt Judgement: It held the follow·
ing: (i) The freedom of speech and expression
and the freedom to practice any profession
or carryon any trade, business or occupation
over the medium of internet enjoys constitutional protection under Article 19(1)(a) and
Article 19(1)(g). The restriction upon such
fundamental rights shou ld be in consonance
with the mandate under Article 19(2) and (6),
inclusive of the test of proportionality; (ii) An
order suspending internet services indefinitely
is impermissible under the Thmporary Suspen·
sion ofThlecom Services (Public Emergency or
Public Safety) Rules, 2017. Suspension can be
utilized for temporary duration only; (iii) Any
order suspending internet issued under the
Suspension Rules, must adhere to the principle
of proportionality and must not extend beyond
necessary duration.
Impact of the Judgement: This judgement
led to the emergence of the right to access to
the internet (or right to access to infonnation
via the internet) as a fundamental right under
the constitution. On the other hand, this judge·
ment a1so recognized the right of the govern·
ment to shutdown the internet by adhering
to the principle of proportionality. These two
situations may create conflicts in th e provision of internet services in the country.

T RAMBABU SINGH THAKUR

l CASE (2020)

Name of the Case

: R.1mbabu Singh Thakur
vs. Sunil Arora
Year of Judgement : 2020
Popular Name

644 ,e!',ndian Polity
Related Tbpi c!
Issue
Re lated Arti cle!
Sc hedule

Crim inal isatio n of
po li tics

Su p reme Co u rt J udgeme n t: It issued vari ous
d irection s aimed at curbing t he grow ing in c ide nce of cr imina ls i n politics. These are: ( i)
It sha ll be ma ndatory for po li ti cal parties (at
the centra l and slate e lection level) to upload
on their website detai led i nformatio n regardin g indi vidual s (with pending c rimin al cases)
who have been selected as ca nd idates. This
shou ld i nclude the nature of the offe nces and
relevant particu lars such as whether c harges
hiwe bee n framed, th e concerned court, t he
case n umbe r etc. The pa rties sho ul d a lso
state the rea sons for such se lection as well as
the reason s for such select ion as we ll as the
reaso n s as to why other ind ivid uals without
cr imina l a n tecedents could not be se lec ted
as ca ndidates; (i i) The reasons a s to se lecti on
sha ll be with reference to the qua lificatio ns,
achi eve me nts and merit of the candidate co ncerned and not mere wi n nability at the polls;
( ii i) This inrorm ation sha H also be published
in one local ve rnacu lar newspaper and one
na tional newspaper, a nd on the offi cia l soc ia l
media platforms of the politica l party, includi ng Facebook and Twitter.
Im pact of the J ud ge me n t: Subseque nt to th is
judgement, the Election Commission sent a
comm un icat ion to al1 th e recogn ize d po li tical parties requ ir ing them to fo ll ow the above
d irection s. Further, it a lso released a new
Form C-7 where in the politica l panics have to
provide a ll the infonnation regarding selected
ca ndidates having crimina l ba ckground.

INTERNET AND MOBILE
ASSOCIATION OF INDIA
CASE (2020)
Na me of the Case
Year o f Judge me nt
Popular Na me
Re lated Topi c!
Issue
Re lated Arti cle!
Sch edu le

,

Intern e t an d Mobi le
Associati on of Ind ia vs.
Reserve Ba nk of In di a
2020
Ban o n cryp to curre n cy trad ing

19

Su pre m e Cou rt Judge me n t: It st ruck down
c ircular iss ued by th e Re serve Bank of
India ( RB I) that had d irected the hanks a nd
financial inst itut io ns not to deal in virtual
c u rrenc ie s (VCs) no r provid e se rvices in
rela tion to VCs. It declared the c irc ular as
ill egal and un e nfo rcea ble on the grou nd of
proportiona l ity. It said that th e RBI itse lf ha d
not fou nd that the ba n ks and financia l in st it ution s have su ffe red a ny loss or adverse ly
effected on account of VC excha nges. Fur·
ther, it a lso ruled tha t the c ircular violates
the freedom to ca rryo n trade u nder Art icl e
19( 1) (g) . He nce, it declared th e c i rcular as
un co nst it utio na l.
it

Im pact of th e J udgeme n t: Thi s judge men t
removed th e ba n on crypto c urre ncy trading
i n Ind ia. This made th e ban ks and finan c ia l
in stitutio ns to rej oin the virtual c urren cy
indu stry a nd do the trading. Furth er, this
j udgement al so bro ugh t into focu s th e n eed
fo r creating a lega l framework fo r regulating
the c rypto curren cy trading and the var ious
iss ues associated with thi s in du stry in Ind ia.

;

)

Landmark ludgements and Their
Table-gO.1 Cases Declaring Amendments
51 No

Impact~, 645

as Unconstitution al

Case (Year)

Amendment Challenged In
the Supreme Court

ProvIsion Declared as
Unconstitutional by
the Supreme Court

1.

"

I.C. Golak Nath vs. State of Punjab (1967)

17th Amendment Act, 1964

171h Amendment (in part)

2.

Kesavananda 8harali VS. State of
Kerala ~1973) (popu)arty known as the

25th Amendment Act, 1971

Article 31C (in part)

_ _ ,__J

r---=:::~
r--~_-Fundamental Rights case)

3,

. Indira Nehru Ghandhi vs. Raj Narain (1975)
(popularly known as the Election case)

39th Amendment Act, 1975

Article 329A (clause 4)

4.

Minerva Mills liS. Union of India (1980)

42nd Amendment Act.

Article 368 (clauses 4 & 5)

....._ _ _ _~------------..::
'9"-7::.
6 ---~----"::n::dc=
A :rtlcle 31C (In p,~'rt
C!I,-_--,
5.

P. Sambamurthy vs. State of Andhra

32nd Amendment Act, 1973

Article 3710 (clause 5 and Its

• 6. ..

Kihoto HoUchan vs. Zachillhu (1992)

S2nd Amendment Act,

Tenth Schedule

r---:--.-_'_p_";..d..;e_' _ho.I'_9_8,;;
61C-_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _-"p'..;0_v.:.
i50.:.1_ __
[-'-_ _ :.!p2p~hi rly known as the Defection case)
7.

L Chandra Kumar vs. Union of India (1997)

I

IP.";'~~

---- - - ---_. - - - - ,

'985

42nd Amendment Act,

1976

Article 323A (sub-clause (d)
of clause 2) and Article 3238

r---------- ______-,--_________ -""(SUb- clause (d) of clause 3)
8.
Supreme Court Advocates-en-Record
99th Amendment Act, 2014
99th Ame-:~,;;-;t:~ _ ]
Association
Union of India (2015)
VS.

(popularly known

case) •

'

! - - --=

as the Fourth Judges
"

l. 9 , - - - - - -

97th Amendment Act, 2011
97th Amendment (In partj
------'----------- --

Union of India vs. Rajendra N Shah (202l)

~--.

Table 90.2 Cases l eading to Constitutional Amendments
51

1

!

No

Case (Year)

Led to the Enactment of the
Amendment Act (partly or fu lly)

1.

Romesh Thappar vs. State of Madras (1950) (popularly known as
the Cross Roads case)

1st Amendment Act, 1951

State of Madras vs. Champakam DoralraJan (1951)

1st Amendment Act, 1951

r--2-,~r-'~"~~=, -~::;hC::U:;:S'-h"'n::':::vs","s"',,:;:,"e -o-'-o-el-h-'-IL9-,5-0-1:,============--~--l'-t-A-!"-~-n-d-m~~,..~_.J
tl 3.

5.

' Electlon Commission vs. Venkata Rao (1953)

15th Amendment Act, 1962

." 6. ..:-?tate Q!~omt?~y_ys~tlD~Mo!~Lfldla_ (~):!-:!rr!ited .(195~), _ _ _ __'6"t"h "AmendmE!!lJ ~9,~56
. 7.

I

w;;;;:;e;;;st':B;:'e':'n;;g':~I"V:;':';'"Be:;j""'::I!."'':n':e'''j''ee':''IL'9-'
'S3:.:1~~==============:4:'h~:.;~:.;m_;e;:.;nd"I!!~~ Act,]955 ---I

i-'':4'',- -'':s''
,,','e'"''o'"
,

j

~

Saghlr Ahrn;d vs. State of Uttar Pradesh (~)_

1
1

4th Am~ment Act, 1955_ ~

8, ~ Bengalll'1}munlty .£:o~pa~Y_Pd.,.vs ..State. of.8ihar.(1955)_" "'-____,6th Amendment Act, .1956-----1
L_9' --r-N.a : Khare vs. Election Commission (1957) _

_

..... _

___ 11th Amendment Act, 1961_

._l

(Contd.)

646 ,~ Indian Polity

State of Madras vs. Mis. Gannon Dunkerley & Co., Madras (1958)

11.

Berubari Union, In Re. (1960)

12.

New India Sugar Mills vs. Commissioner of Sales Tax, Bihar (1962)

13.

Chandra Mohan vs. Stat e of U.P. (1966)

14.

I.C. Golak Nath vs. State of Punjab (1967)

15.

R.C. Cooper vs. Union of India (1970) (popularly known as the Bank

9th Amendment Act. 1960
46th Amendment Act. 19S:Z
20th Amendment Act. 1962
24th Amendment Act. 1971
25th Amendment Act. 1971

Nationalisatlon case)

16.

Madhav Rao Sclndla vs. Union of India (1970) (popularly k nown 8 S

26th Amendment act, 1971

the Privy Purse case)
17.

State of Himachal Pradesh VS. Associated Hotels of India Ltd. (1972)

46th Amendment Act, 1982

18.

011 and Natural Gas Commission vs. State of Bihar (1976)

46th Amendment Act. 19S:Z

19.

Mlsrilal Jain vs. State of Orissa (1977)

20.

Vishu Agencies vs. Commercial Tax Officer (1977)

21.

Northern India Caterers (India) Ltd. vs. Lt. Governor of Deihl (1978)

22.

Prabhakaran Nair vs. Slate of Tamil Nadu (1987)

23.

Indra Sawhney vs. Union of India (1992)
(popularly known as the Mandai case)

24.

Unnl Krlshnan vs. State of A.P. (1993)

25.

Union of India vs. Vlrpal Singh Chauhan (1995)

85th Amendment Act, 2001

26.

S. Vlnod Kumar vs. Union of India (1996)

82nd Amendment Act, 2000

27.

AJlt Singh Januja vs. State of Punj ab (1996)

8 5th Amendment Act, 2001

28.

T.M.A. Pel Foundation vs. State of Karnataka (2002)

93rd Amendment Act. 2005

29.

P.A. Inamdar vs. State of Maharashtra (2005)

93rd Amendment Act, 2005

43rd Amendment Act, 1977
46th Amendment Act, 1982
46th Amend ment Act, 1982
75th Amendment Act, 1993
76th Amendment Act. 1994;
77th Amendment Act, 1995;
81st Amendmen t Act. 2000;
82nd Amendment Act, 2000; and
85th Amendment Act. 2001
86th Amendment Act, 200:Z

Important Doctrines
of Constitutional
Interpretation
~ DOCTRINE OF SEVERABILITY

II IMeaning of the Doctrine
The doctrine of severability is also known
as the doctrine of separability. This doctrine
was devised by the Supreme Court to resolve
the problem of the validity of laws which are
declared as unconstitutional.
When a part of the law is declared as institutional, then a question arises whether the whole
of the law is to be declared void or only that part
of the law, which is unconstitutional should be
declared as void. Al:cording to this doctrine, if the
offending provision of the law can be separated
from that provision which is constitutional, then
only that part of the law, which is offending, is
to be declared as void and not the whole of the
law. In other 'WOrds, if the invalid part of the law
can be separated from the rest, then the rest may
continue to be valid and operative. If, however,
it is not possible to separate the valid part of the
law from the invalid part, then the whole of the
law is declared as void.

II IBasis of the Doctrine
Article 13 is the basis of the doctrine of severability. It makes the following two provisions
'in this regard:
1. Article 13(1) deals with the pre-constitution laws and declares that all such laws are
void to the extent to which they are inconsistent with the Fundamental Rights l .
l'A rticle 13(1) reads as follows: ~(1) All laws in force
in the territory of India immediately before the

commencement of this Constitution, in so far as
they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Part,
shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void. ~

2. Article 13(2) deals with the post-constitution laws and prohibits the state
from making a law which takes away
or abridges the Fundamental Rights and
any such law is void to the extent of the
contravention2 •
Only that portion of a law, which violates
the Fundamental Rights, can be declared as
void and not the whole of it.
The Supreme Court has explained the doctrine of severability in the following way3:
liThe question whether a statute which is
void in part is to be treated as void in toto,
or whether it is capable of enforcement
as to that part which is valid. The answer
to this question must depend on whether
what is valid could be separated from what
is invalid, and that is a question which has
to be decided by the Court on a consideration of the provisions of the Act."

II IPropositions of the Doctrine
The Supreme Court has laid down the following propositions (rules) regarding the
doctrine of severability 4:
1 . In determining whether the valid parts of
a statute are separable from the invalid
parts thereof, it is the intention of the
legislature that is the determining factor. The test to be applied is whether the
2Article 13(2) reads as follows: N(2) The State shall

not make law which takes away or abridges the
rights conferred by this Part and any law made in
contravention of this clause shall, to the extent of
the contravention, be void .~
3R.M.D. Chamarbaugwalla vs. Union of India. (1957).
4Ibid.

648

r:7

Indian Pallty

legislature would have e n acted the va lid
pa rt if it had k nown th at the rest of the
statute was inva lid.
2. If the valid and invalid provis ions are so
inextricably mixed up that they ca nnot
be separated from on e another, then the
in validity of a portion mu st result in
the invalidity of the Act in its entirety.
On the other ha nd, if they are so distinct and sepa rate that after striking
out what is in valid , what remains is
in itself a complete code independent
of the rest, then it will be upheld notwithstan ding that the rest has becom e
unenforceable.

3. Even when the provisions which afe valid

are di stinct a nd separate from those
which are invalid, if they all form pa rt
of a single scheme which is intended to
be operative as a whole, then also the
invalidity of a part will resu lt in the
failure of the whole.
4. Likewise, when the valid and invalid parts
of a statute are independent and do not
form part of a scheme but what is left
after o mitting the inva lid porti on is
so thin and truncated as to be in substance different from what it was when

Table 91.1
SI No

1.

2.

it emerged out of the leg islature, then
a lso it will be rejected in its entirety.
5. The separability of the valid and invalid
prov ision s of a statute does not depend
on whether the law is enacted in the
same section or diffe rent section; it is
not the form, but the substance of the
matter that is material , and that has to
be ascertained on an examination of the
Act as a whole and of the setting of the
relevant provision there in.
6. If after the invalid portion is expunged
from the statute what remains cannot be
e nforced without making alterations and
modifications therein, then the whole of
it must be struck down as void, as otherwise it will a mount to judicial legislation.
7. In determ ining the leg islative inte nt on
the question of separability, it will be
legitimate to take into account the history of the legislation, its object, the title
a nd the preamble to it.

IIIImportant Cases
The important cases relating to the doctrine
of severability and their judgements are given
in Thble 91.1.

Important Ca ses Relati ng to the Doctrine of Severab ility
Case (Year)

Supreme Court Judgement

A.K. Gopalan VS. State
of Madras (1950)

It struck down Section 14 of the Preventive Detention Act (1950) on the
ground that It violates the fundamental right under Article 22 of the
Constitution. It declared the rest of the Act as valid and effective s.

----------------------Stete of Bombay vs. F.N.

It dectared eight 5edIons of the Bombay Prohibition Act (1949) as ultravtres 0,.. the ground of Infringement of the ful1demental rights. tt held
......_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _-'-t!:'!lJ!;1e Id prOV}sl9
I not affe<t the validity of
entire Act
Batura (1951)

3.

R.M.D. Chamarbaugwalla vs.
Union of India (1957)

•

It held that the provisions of the Pri ze Competitions Act (1955) were
severable and struck down those provisions which related to competitions Involving skll1. In this case, the validity of Section 2(d) of the Act ,
which included competition of gambllng as well as those Involving
skill, was challenged. Accord ing to Article 19(1)(g), the Parliament can
restrict prize competitions only of a gambling nature but not those
Involving skill.

s-rhe Supreme Court observed: "The impugned Act minus this section can remain unaffected. The om ission
of this sectio n will not change the nature or the structure or the object of the legislation . Therefore, the
decision that Section 14 is ultra·vires, does not affect the validity of the rest of the Act-.

____________________________________
SI No

~lm~p~o~r'~o~n'~D~OCU~~in~.s~o~f~C~o~ns~m~·u~.~on~a~I~ln~'.~~~r~.~'a~ti~on~~
~A 649

Case (Year)

Supreme Court Judgement

4.

Mlner'.ll'8 Mills vs).I\Jnlon
of India (1980)

·It struck down sections 4 and 5S.ofthe 42nd Amendment Act (1976) for
being beyond the amending power of the Parliament. It declared the
rest of the Act as valid.

5.

Kihoto Hollchan vs.
Zachlllhu (1992)
(Popularly known as the

it declared paragraph 7 of the Tenth Schedule (which was Inserted by

Defection case)

.

,

the 52nd Amendment Act, 1985) as unconstitutional for violating the
provision under Article 368(2)', It upheld the rest of the Tenth Schedule
(I.e., Tenth Schedule minus paragraph 7 is velld).

l QOCTRINE OF WAIVER

waive his fundamental rights. In short, there
is the doctrine of non-waiver in India.

II !Meaning of the Doctrine

fJ IPosition In India

The doctrine of waiver is based on the premise that a person who is entitled to a right or
privilege is at liberty to waive or give up that
right or privilege. It is a voluntary renunciation of a known right or privilege.
The doctrine of waiver is defined in the
following way':
"Waiver is an intentional relinquishment
of a right. It involves conscious abandonment of an existing legal right, advantage, benefit, claim or privilege, which
except fo r such a waiver, a party could
have enjoyed. In fact, it is an agreement
not to assert a right. There can be no
waiver unless the person who is said to
have waived, is full y informed as to his
rights and with full knowledge about the
same, he intentionally abandons them."
It must be noted here that the doctrine of
waiver is not applicable to the fundamental
rights 'in India. In other words, a citizen can
n ot waive his fundamental rights in India.
~n the other hand, the doctrine of waiver is
applicable to the fundamental rights in USA.
In other words, an American citizen can

'Paragraph 7 requires ratification under the proviso
to Article 36B(2) for excluding the jurisdiction of
High Courts under Article 226 and Supreme Court
under Article 136.
7Surendra Malik and Sudeep Malik, Supreme Court
on Doctrines and Maxims, Eastern Book Company,
2014, pp. 697·698.

With respect to the application of the doctrine of waiver to India, the Suprem e Court
made the following observations8 :
1. Fundamental Rights cannot b e waived by
a citizen. They are mandatory on the
state and necessary to attain the objectives enshrined in the Preamble. Hence,
no citizen ' can relieve the state of this
obligation which is imposed on it by the
constitution.
2. The doctrine of waiver enunciated by
some American Judges in construing
the American Constitution cannot be
introduced in our constitution.
3. The fundamental rights have not been put
in the Constitution merely for individual
benefit, though ultimately, they come
into operation in con sidering individual
rights. They have been put there, as a
matter of public policy and the doctrine
of waiver can have no application to provisions of law, which h ave been enacted
as a matter of constitutional policy.
4. Referen ce to some of the articles, inter
alia, articles 15(1), 20, 21, makes the
proposition quite plain. A citizen cannot get discrimination by telling the
State "You can discriminate", or get con victed by waiving the protection given
under articles 20 and 21.
8Basheshar

( 1958).

Nath vs. Commissioner of Income 'nix

650 ~ Indian Polity
Table 91.2
51 No

Important Cases Relating to the Doctrine of Waiver

Case (Year)

Supreme Court Judgement

1.

Behram Khurshld Peslkaka
vs. State of Bombay (1954)

It held that In a criminal prosecution, It Is not open to an accused person
to waive his fundamental rights and get convicted.

2.

Basheshar Nath VI.
COmmisSIoner or Income

tt rejected the contentiOn of the respondent that the petitioner by voluntarily entertng Into an agreement to PlY the tax had waived his fundamental right guaranteed under Article 14. It upheld the contention of the

Tex "958)

petItlon8l" holding that the fundamental rights could not be waived.

3.

Olga Tellis vs. Bombay
Mun icipal Corporation (1985)
(Popularly known as the
Pavement Dwellers case)

It held that a person cannot waive any of the fundamental rights conferred
upon him by any of his act and there cannot be any estoppel against the
constitution. It asserted that the high purpose which the constitution seeks
to achieve by conferment of fundamental rights Is not only to benefit the
Individual but to secure the larger Interests of the community.

4.

Nar Singh Pal VS. Union of
Indl. (2000)

It reiterated that the fundamental rights under the constftutIon caMOt be bartered tJWtJY. 1t essertecI that the funcsamental rights cannot be compromised.
nor can there be any estoppel against the exercfse of fundamental rights.

5. Whatever be the position in America, no
distinction can be drawn here, as has
been attempted in the United States
of America, between the fundam ental
rights which may be said to have been
enacted for the benefit of the individual
and those enacted in public interest or
on grounds of public policy.
6. Ours is a nascent democracy and situated
as we are, socially, economically, educa·
tionally, and politically, it is the sacred
duty of the Supreme Court to safeguard
the fundamental rights.

g IImportant Cases
The important cases relating to the doctrine
of waiver and their judgements are given in
Thble 91.2.

l DOCTRINE OF ECLIPSE
II IMeaning of the Doctrine
The prospective nature of the provision under
Article 13(1) of the co nstitution has led to
the emergence of the doctrine of eclipse. This
provision deals with the pre-constitution laws
and declares that all such laws are void to the

extent to wh ich they are inconsistent with the
Fundamental Rights 9 •
The doctrine of eclipse is based on the
notion that a pre-co nstitutional law which
is inconsistent with a fundamental right is
not a nullity or void from its very inception. Such a law becomes only inoperative
from the date of the commencement of the
constitution. It is overshadowed or eclipsed
by the fundamental righ t and reJt1ains dormant but is not dead altogether. It is not
wiped out completely from the statute book.
It continues to exist ( i) for all past transactions; (ii) for the enforcement of rights
acquired and liabilities incurred before the
date of the commen ce m ent of the constitution; and (iii) for the determination of
rights of non-citizens who have not been
given the fundamenta l rights by the constitution. Thus, it do es not be come void "in
toto" or for all purposes or for all times or
for all persons.
9Anicle 13(1) reads as follows: "(1) All laws in force
in the temtory of India immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution, in so far as
they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Part.
shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void. ~

__________________________________-C~m~p~on~o=n~'~D~o=cu~;n~e~s~oLfC=o~n~sm
=·=u"=o~no=I~ln~'=
e~~~~'o~ti=on~_>, 651
However, if the shadow cast on such a law
by the relevant fundamental right is removed
by an amendment of the constitution, then the
law would again become constitutional and
enforceable. In other words, the amendment
of the fundamental right makes the impugned
law free from all blemish or infirmity.

fli Formulation of the Doctrine
The doctrine of eclipse was enunciated by the
Supreme Court in the Bhikaji case lO (1955). In
this case, Section 43 of the Motor Vehicles Act
(1939) was amended by the Central Provinces
and Berar Motor Vehicles (Amendment Act
1947). This provision empowered the State
Government to take over the motor transport
business to the exclusion of individual operations. But it became void with the commencement of the constitution in 1950 as it violated
the fundamental right under Article 19(1)(g).
Later, the 1st Amendment Act (1951)
amended Article 19(6) and enabled the government to take over any trade or business either
exclusively or in competition with the indivjduals. Consequently, the State Government
issued a notification to take over the motor
transport business. This notification was challenged in the Supreme Court. The State Government argued that from January 26, 1950 to
June 18, 1951, Section 43 of the Motor Vehicles
Act (1939) remained invalid, but the amendment of the provision under Article 19(6) by
the 1st Amendment Act (1951) made the same
Section 43 of the Act valid again.
Finally, the Supreme Court held that the
impugned Act became, for the time being,
eclipsed by the fundamental right but the amendment of Article 19(6) removed the shadow. In
other words, the court upheld the validity of the
notification by applying the doctrine of eclipse.

1.1) Application to Post-Constitutional

t Laws

Article 13(1) deals with the pre-Constitution
laws while Article 13(2) deals with the postConstitution laws. The latter prohibits the
lOBhikaji Narain Dhakras vs. State of M.P. (1955).

state from making a law which takes away or
abridges the fundamental rights and·any such
law is void to the extent of the contravention 11.
In Deep Chand case l2 (1959), the Supreme
Court held that the doctrine of eclipse applies
only to the pre-Constitution laws and not to
the post-Constitution laws. This is because, a
post-Constitution law which contravenes a fundamental right is a nullity or void from its very
inception and a still-born law. Therefore, it cannot be revived by a subsequent constitutional
amendment. Accordingly, the court upheld the
constitutionality of the Uttar Pradesh 'fiansport
Service (Development) Act, 1955 saying that it
did not violate Article 31 of the Constitution.
In Mahendra Lal Jain case i3 (1962), the
Supreme Court reiterated its verdict delivered
in Deep Chand case l4 (1959) and held that the
doctrine of eclipse cannot be applied to the
post-Constitution laws. The court observed:
"The doctrine of eclipse will apply to
pre-Constitution laws which are governed
by Article 13(1) and would not apply to
post..constitution laws which are governed
by Article l3(2). Unlike a law governed
by Article l3(1) which was valid when
made, the law made in contravention
of the prohibition contained in Article
13(2) is a stillborn law either wholly or
partially depending upon the extent of the'
contravention. Such a law is dead from the
beginning and there can be no question of
its revival under the doctrine of eclipse~.
However, the position in Ambica Mills
easelS (1974) was different. In this case, the
Supreme Court reversed its earlier stand
and applied the doctrine of eclipse eyen to
a post-Constitution law. The court held that
a post-Constitution law which violates the
Article 13(2) reads as follows: "(2) The State shall
not make law which takes away or abridges the
rights conferred by this Part and any law made in
contravention of this clause shall, to the extent of
the contravention, be void. ~
12Deep Chand vs. State ofV.P. (1959).
13Ma hendra Lal Jain vs. State of U.P. ( 1962).
14Deep Chand vs. State of V.P. (1959)15State ofGujarat vs. Shri Ambica Mills Ltd. (1974)

11

652

,r(! Indian Pality

fundamenta l rights is not a nu ll ity or vo id
in all cases and for all purposes. Further, it
sa id that there a re many exce ptions to the
doctr in e of a bsolute nullity and hen ce, it
cannot be rega rded as a uni ve rsa l rule. A
post-Constitution law which violates the fundament right co nferred by Article 19 will be
effective as regards to non-citizens because
fundament al rights a re not co nferred on
them. On the other hand , such a law will
become a nulli ty or void on ly against citi ze n s
beca use fundamenta l r ights are ava ilab le to
t he m.
Accordingly, the Bombay Labo ur Welfa re
Funer Act ( 1953) was he ld to be va lid and
operative with regard to non-citizens.
Later, th e Supreme Court applied the doctrine of ecl ipse to a post-Con stitution law even
agai n st citizens in Dulare Lodh case l6 (1984).

1

DOCTRINE OF TERRITORIAL
NEXUS

II IMeaning of the Doctrine
The doctrine of territorial ne.xus is rated to Article 245 which deals with the extent oflaws made
by the Parliament and the State Legislatures. It
co ntains the following provisions:
I . The Par1ia ment is empowered to m ake
laws for the whole or a ny part of the territory of Indi a. In addition , it can also
make ~ext ra-te rr itori a l legislation". This
implies that the Parliam en ta ry laws a re
applicable n ot only to th e persons and
property within th e territory of Ind ia
but also to th e Indian cit izens and the ir
property in any part of th e world.
2. A State Leg isl ature is e mpowered to
make laws for the whole or any part of
the state. Unlike the Pa rliament , a State
Legislature cannot make "extra-territorial
legislation".
From the above, it is clear that the laws
made by a State Legislature are not applicabl e
outside the state. However, there is one exceptio n to this ge neral rule i.e., an extra-territoria l
16Dlflare LOlli, vs. II/ rei Adeliriollal District Judge,
Kallpur (1984 ).

legislation made by a State Legislacure is valid
when th ere is a sufficient nexus between the
state and the objec[. This is known as the doctrine of territoria l nexus.
According to the doctrine of territoria l
nexus, the object to which a state law applies
need n ot be physically loca ted within the
state te rri tory, but it is required that there
should be a suffi cient n exus or conn ection
between the state a nd the subject-m atter of
th e law. This mea n s that a state law h av ing
ex tra-te rritor ial operation is held va lid by
a ppl y ing the doctrine of territoria l nexus.

!I IFormulation of the Doctrine
In the pre-Co n stitut ion period, there were
three important cases in which the doct rin e
of terri toria l nexus was app li ed. The Federal
Court app li ed th e doctrine in Ra leigh ease l7
( 1944) a nd Wa,Ua ease lS ( 1949) while the
Pri vy Co un ci l app lied it in Wallace case l9
( 1948). T hese three cases we re related to th e
income-tax law.
In t h e p ost-Constitut io n pe ri od, t h e
Supreme Court applied the doctrine in R.M.D.
Chama rbaugwalla case 20 ( 1957). This C<lse
was related to the law impos ing a tax on
gambli ng . In this case, the co urt h eld tha t if
there is a sufficient territorial n exus b etwee n
the person sought to be taxed and th e sta te
seeking to tax him, the taxi ng law is upheld.
It also clarified that the sufficiency of teHitorial nexu s involves a co nsideration of the
follo wi ng two important elements:
l. The nexus mu st be real a nd n ot illusory;

and

2_ The liability so ugh t to be imposed must
b e relevant to that nexus.
In TISCO case 21 (1958), the Supreme Court
applied the doctrine to the sa les-tax law. In
17GovenlOr-Gelleml

vs. Raleig11 Investment company

(1944).
IIlA.H. Watlia vs. Commissioner of Ill come-Thx ( 1949).

I!l Wallace Brothers a lld Company Limited vs. Commissioner of jllcome-7hx (1948).
20Srate of Bombay vs. RM.D. ClIamal'ballgwalla ( 19575.
'TWa Ira" ami Steel Comp(II1Y \'s. SUite of BOwl'
(1958).

"

Important Doarines of Constitutionallnterpretat;on

this case, the COUTt observed that this doctrine
does not impose the tax, hut it only indicates
the circumstances in which a tax imposed by
a Jaw sha11 be enforced in a particular case. .
In NTPC case22 (2002), the Supreme Court
has explained the doctrine in the following way:
"It is by reference to the ambit or limits of territory by which the legislative
powers vested in parliament and the

I

\

State Legislatures are divided ,i n Art. 245.
Generally speaking, a legislation hav ing
extraterritorial operation can be enacted
onl y by Parliament and not by any State
Legislature; poss ibl y the only exception
being one where extra-territorial operation of a State legislation is sustainabl~
on the grou.nd of territorial nexus. Such
territorial nexus, when pleaded must"be
sufficient and real and not illusory."

II IApplication to Non-Tax Laws
The doctrine of territorial nexus is applicable
not onl y to tax laws like income-tax' law, law
imposing a tax on gambling and sales-tax law
but also to other kinds of laws.
Thus, in Charusila Dasi case 23 ( 1959), the
Supreme Court held that a State Legislature is
empowered to make laws with respect to charitable and religious trusts situated within the
territory of the state even though some part
of the tru st property is situated in another
state. As a natural corollary to -this,' the State
Legislature is also empowered to make laws
in respect of the trustees, their servants and
agents who are in that state to administer the
trust. Accordingly, th e court upheld the va lidity of a law made by the Bihar Legislature
with respect to trust property situated in the
state of West Bengal.
Likewi se, in Shrikant case 24 ( 1994), the
Supreme Court held that the Gujarat Sta te
was empowered to make the law so as to provide that the ceiling of agricultural land of a
22Stcae of AP. vs. National Thennal Power Corporation
Limited ( 2002 ).
23State of Bi/Jar vs. C1JaYUsila Dasi (1959).
24 Shrikam Bl1a lc1landra Karu lkar vs. State of GlIjarat
( 1994).

~. 653

person in that State cou ld be determined by
taking into account the agricultural land held
by him outside that state also. Accordingly,
the co urt upheld the validity of the Gujarat
Agricultural Land Ceiling Act ( 1960).

D IExceptions to the Doctrine
The doctrine of territorial nex~s is not applicable in the following two situations:
L Whe n a state government (while acting
under the Motor Vehicles Act - a Central
legi sla,tion) approves a scheme for
inter-state routes for the State Transport
Und e rtak ing. In Khazan Singh case 25
( 1973) , the 'Supreme Court upheld the
. va lidity of a Uttar Pradesh scheme
nationalizing certain routes betwe en
that State and the State.of Rajasthan.
2. When a state carryo n trade and business
under the provision of "Article 298. In
the same Khazan Singh case 26 (1973),
the Supreme Court held that the trade
and business to be carried on b y a state
need not be restricted to the area within
its boundaries.

e DOCTRINE OF PITH
. AND SUBSTANCE

l

II IMeaning of the Doctrine
Article 246 deals with .the division of legislati ve .powers betwee n the Parliament and the
State Legislatures. It specifi es the different
sl!bjects of legislation in three lists, namely,
List I , (Union List), List II (State . List) and
List III (Co ncurrent List). Accordingly, the
Parliament or a State Legislature should make
laws within their respective jurisdictions and
sh ould not en croach upon the other's sphere.
If it encroaches, then the validity of the law
enacted by it is determin ed by applying the
doctrine of pith and substance.
'According to this doctrine, a law in question must be looked into as an organic whole
and not as a !pere collection of sections, for
"l5K1wzan Singh vs. State of U.P. (1973).
26Tbid.

_6
=5::!
4_K' Indian Pality
determining the true nature and character of
the impugned law Le., the pith and substance
of the law. If it is found that the pith and
substance of the impugned law relates to the
subject within the domain of the Legislature
enacting the law, then the law would be held
valid even though it incidentally encroaches on
subjects wh ich have been assign ed to another
Legislature. Further, for applying the doctrine,
one must have regard (a) to the enactment as
a whole, (b) to its main objects, and (c) to the
scope and effect of its provisions.

!II Rationale of the Doctrine
The doctrine of pith and substance was
evolved by the Privy Cou ncil when it deter·
min ed appea ls from Ca nada or Australia
involving the question of leg islative competence of the Ce n tre, or the states in those
federations. Later, this doctrine came to be
established in India where it derives its genesis from the approach adopted by the courts
including the Privy Co un cil in dealing with
controversies arising in other federations.
While explaining the rationale of the doctrine, the Supreme Court made the fo ll owing
observation 27 :
HIt must be remembered that we are con-

struing a federal Constitution. It is of the
essence of such a Constitution that there
should be a distribution of th e legislative
powers of the Federation between the
Centre and the Provinces. The scheme
of distribution has varied with different
Constitutions, but even whe n the Constitution enumerates elaborately the topics
on which the Cen tre and the States could
legislate, some overlapping of the fields
of legislation is inevitable".

III Principles of the Doctrine
In the pre-Constitution period, the doctrine of
pith and substance was applied by the Privy
Coun cil in Prafulla Kumar case2S ( 1947). This
21A.S. Kn·sh na \'S. State of Madras ( 1956 ).
28 Prafulla

(1947).

Kumar Mukherjee vs. Bank of Commerce

case involved the interpretation of the division
of powers under the Governmen t of India Act,
1935. In this case, the validity of the Bengal
Money Lenders Act, 1946 was challenged all the
ground that it was ultra-vires the Bengal Legisla·
ture in so far as it related to Hpromissory notes·
which was a central subject. The Calcutta High
Court held the Act to be intra-vires while the
Federal Court, on appeal, reversed it. Final1y,
the Privy Council held that the Act was, in pith
and substance, a law in respect of Hmon ey lendingW and "money lendersw-a state subject a nd
hence, was valid even though it incidental1y
encroached on "promissory notes~.
In the above case, the Privy Cou ncil laid
down the following principles of the doctrine
of pith and substance:
I . It is not possible to make a clea r-cut
demarcation between the powers of the
Federal Legislature an d the Provincial
Legislature. The powers are bound to
overlap from to time. where they o\'erlap, the question s must be asked are:
(a) What, in pith and substance, is the
effect of the e nactment of which
complaint is made?
(b) In what list is its true nature and
character to be found?
If these questions could not be asked,
much beneficent legislation would be
stifled at birth , and many of the subjects
entrusted to the Provisional Legislature
co uld never effectively be deals wit h.
Z. The extents of t he in vasion by the
Provin ces into subjects enumerated in
the Federa l List has to be considered.
No doubt it is an impo rtant matter, not
because the \'alid ity of an Act can be
determined by discriminating between
degrees of invasion, but for the purpose
of determining what is the pith and substa nce of the impugned Act.
3. Where the three lists come in conflict,
List I has priority over Lists III and II ,
and List III has priority over List II. But,
the question still remains, prior ity "in
what respect? Does the priority of the
Federal Legislature prevent the Provincial
Legislatu re from dealing with any matter

Important Doctrines of Constitutional Interpretation
Table 91.3
51 No

t

2.

3.

4.

Important Cases Relating to the Doctrine of Pith and Substance
Case (Year)

Suprem e Court Judgem ent

State of Bombay \IS . F.N.
Balsara (1951)

It upheld the validity of the Bombay ProhibItion Act, 1950. This
Act was challenged on the ground that In encroached upon II matter enumer
ated In the
Union List.

D.N. BanerJI vs. P.R.
Mukherjee (1952)

It upheld the validity of the Industrial Disputes Act of the Parliam
ent. This
Act (In so far as It applied to the municipalities) was challenged
on the
ground that It related to the local govemm ent whIch was a subject
enumer·
ated In the State list

State of Rajasthan \IS.
G. Chawla (1958)

It upheld the validity of the Rajasthan Act whIch restricted the use
of sound
amplifiers. This Act was challenged on the ground that It encroac
hed upon
the subject of broadcastIng or communlcatfon which Is mention
ed In the
Union List.

State of GUJarat vs.
Shantilal Mangaldas

It held that the doctrine of pith and substance is applicable In determ
ining
whether an Act Is within the competence of the legislature; It Is
wholly Irrelevant In determining whether the Act Infringes any fundamental
right

M. Ismail Faruqul vs.
UnIon of IndIa (1994)

It upheld the va lidity of the Acquisition of Certain Area at Ayodhy
a Act, 1993
made by the Parliament. It held that the pith and substance of the
Act was
'acquisition of property' and not related to 'public order' and hence,
It fell
within the ambIt of the Concurrent List.

lameer Ahmed latlfur
Rehman SheIkh vs. State
of Maharashtra (2010)

It upheld the validity of the Maharashtta Control of Organised Crime
Act,
1999. The Act was challenged on the ground that It encroached
upon the
subject enumerated In the Union list.

11969)

5.

6.

~ 655

which may incide ntally affect any item
in its list or in each case has one to consider what the substance of the Act is and,
whatever its ancillary effect, attribute it to
the appro priate list according to its true
character? The latter is the true view.
In the post- Cons titutio n perio d, the
Supre me Court has consis tently applie d the
above princi ples in a numb er of cases.

Eljlm porta nt Cases
The impor tant cases relatin g to the doctri ne
of pith and substa nce and their judge ments
are given in Thble 91.3.

e DOC TRIN E OF COLOURABLE

l

. LEGISLATION

III Meaning of the Doctrine
The consti tution (unde r Article 246) provides
for the divisi on of legislative powers betwe en

the Parlia ment and the State Legislatures. It
enum erates the legisla tive subjects in three
lists, namel y, the Union List, the State and
the Concu rrent List under the Seventh Schedule. Both are requir ed to opera te within their
respective legislative compe tence.
But, some times, a legisl ature makes a law
which, thoug h in form appea rs to be within
its compe tence, in effect and substa nce lies
beyon d its ambit . Then the law would be
declar ed as void. In other words, the differ ent
colou r given to the law (by the legisl ature so
as to bring it within its ambit ) would not save
it from being declar ed as invalid. Such a law
is called as colou rable legisla tion.
Colourable legisl ation would emerg e only
when a legisl ature had no power to legislate on an item either becau se it was not
includ ed in the list assign ed to it under the
respective entrie s in the Seventh Schedule, or
on accou nt of limita tions impos ed wheth er
under Part III of the Const itution (relati ng to

656

i'

Indian Polity

the Fundamental rights) or any other power
under the co nstitution.
The whole doctrine of calourable legislation
is based upon the maxim that "you cannot do
indirectly, what yo u cannot do directly" (Le.,
what cannot be don e directly, ca nnot also be
done indirectly) . This means that the use of
the expression 'calourable legi slation' seeks
to convey that by enacting the legislation in
question , the legi slature is seeking to do indi·
reed y what it cannot do directly.

!I IPropositions of the Doctrine
The Supreme Court ha s laid down th e following propositions in respect of the doc trine of
ca lourable legislation Z9 :
1. If t he constitution distributes the legislative powers amongst different legislat ive
bodies, which have to act within their
respective sph eres ma rked out by specific
legislative entries, or if there are limitations on the leg islative authority in the
shape of fundamental rights, questions
do arise as to whether the legislature in a
particular case has or has not, in respect
of the subj ect-matter of the sta tute or in
the method of enacting it, transgressed
the limits of its co nstitutional powers. Such t ransgression may be patent,
ma nifest or direct, but it may also be
disguised, covert and indi rect and it is to
this latter class of cases that the expression 'colourable legisla tio n ' ha s been
applied in judicial pronouncements.
2 . The idea conveyed by the expression that
although apparently a legislature in
passing a statute purported to act within
the limits of its powers, yet in substance
and in reality it tra nsgressed these powers, the tran sgression being veil ed by
what appears, on proper exam ination,
to be a mere pretence or disguise.
3. It is the substa nce of the Act that is material and not merely the form or outward
appearance, and if the subj ect-matter
2!J K.G. Gajapati Narayall Deo

vs. State of OriSSiI ( 1953).

in su bstan ce is something which is
beyond the powers of that legislature to
legislate upon, the form in which th e
law is cloth ed wou ld n ot save it from
condemnat ion.
4. The legislature cannot violate the constitutional prohibitions by em ploy ing an
indirect method. In cases like these, the
enquiry must always be as to the true
nature and chara cter of the challenged
legislation, and it is the result of such
in vestigatio n and not the form alone
that will determine as to whether or not
it relates to a subj ect which is within
the power of the leg islative authority.
For the purpose of this investigation the
cou rt would certa inly examine the effect
of the legislation and take into consideratio n its object, purpose or design. But
these are only rel evant for the purpose
of ascertaining the true character and
substance of the e nactm e n t and the
class of subjects of leg islation to which
it reaJI y belongs a nd not for finding out
the motives wh ich induced the legislatu re to exercise its powe rs.
5. The doctrine of colourable legislation
does not involve any question of bona
fides or mala fides on the pa rt of the
legislature. The whole doctrine resolves
itself into the question of competen cy
of a particular leg isla t ure to enact
a particular law. If the legis lature is
compete nt to pass a particular law, the
motives whi ch impelled it to act are
rea ll y irre levant. On the other hand, if
th e leg isla ture la cks competency, the
question of motive does not arise at all.
Wh ether a statute is constitutional or
not in t hus always a question of power.
6. A Cou n must be blind indeed if it looks
merely at the language of a statute and
ignores its obviou s purpose, effect a nd
operation. Hence, wh en , a statute is
i mpugn ed as being a mere colourable
device to evade constitutional provisions,
the Court is required to scruti ni ze in its
entirety, the impugned sta tute as well as

_ _ ________________ ...!!.m~o"_"~o~nt!.:D"o"'ct"',:"i""'e=_s!00L:c':'o"-"~st"'it"'U""'·o'!'"~alC'/~nt"'e~re"'t"at"'io'!'"~:3, 657
other Bills or Acts which may form part
of a scheme for such evasion, for the
purpose of ascertaining ~the true nature
and character" or "pith and substance" of
the impugned statute. Sometimes, it may
so happen that statute, when considered
independently, may be free from any
objection but if it could be shown that it
is part of a general scheme on the part
of the Legislature, by a series of Acts to
achieve an object which it could not validly achieve in one piece of legislation,
the statute would also be struck down as
unconstitutional.

oI

Doctrine of Fraud on
the Constitution

The doctrine of calourable legislation is also
known as the doctrine of fraud on the constitution. The Supreme Court, in this context,
has made the following observation 30 :
"Colourable piece of legislation is a
legislation ostensibly under one or the
other of the powers conferred by the
constitution but in substance and real~
. ity, not falling within the content of that
power. The failure to comply with a Con~
stitutional condition for the exercise of
legislative power may be overt or it may
be' covert. When it is overt, we say the
law is obviously bad for non~comp1iance
with the requirements of the Constitu~
tion, that is to say, the law. is ultra vires.
When, however, the non~compliance is
covert, we say that it is a 'fraud on the
Constitution', the fraud complained of
being that the Legislature pretends to
act within its power while in fact it is
not ~o doing. Therefore, the charge of
'fraud on the Constitution' is, on ultimate analysis, nothing but a picturesque
and epigrammatic way of expressing the
idea of non~comp1ian ce with the terms
of the Constitution".
30State of Bihar vs. Kameshwar Singh (1952 ).

911Doctrine of Fraud on Legislative
Power

It must be noted here that the doctrine of
fraud on the Constitution is different from
the doctrine of fraud on legislative power.
The Supreme Court, while explaining this
distinction, made the foHowing observation31 :
1. The doctrine of fraud on legislative power
means that the legislature really has the
power, but does not exercise that power.
It merely pretends to have exercised the
power. In the eye of law, such an Act is
not a law at all, but is a mere pretence
of law and the courts will not take notice
of such a law.
2. The doctrine of fraud on the Constitution
is altogether a different principle and a
serious charge. When there is a consti~
tutional prohibition to make an Act, but
the legislature, in spite of the constitutional prohibition, enacts such a law, it
is a fraud on the Constitution. Therefore,
the distinction between the fraud on
legislative power and fraud on the
Constitution is clear and unambiguous.
3. The principle of fraud on legislative
power is applicable when the legisla~
ture has power to enact, but has not
exercised that power as envisaged upon.
On the other hand, the doctrine of fraud
on the Constitution means that when
the legislature ha s no power and in
spite of the constitutional prohibition,
it makes an enactment in pretence of
or purported exercise of the power. It
would, therefore, be necessary to exa~­
ine these concepts in the light of the
related subject, the legislative history,
the respective entries in the lists con~
cerned of the Seventh Schedule and the
power of the legislature to determine
whether the legislature has compete"nce
to enact law or enacted it by playing a
fraud on the Constitution/colourable
exercise of power.
3IS.S. Bola vs. B.D. Sardana ( 1997).

I'

658

,¥!, Indian Polity

Table 91.4
51 No

1.

2.

3.

4.

Important Cases Relating to the Doctrine of Colourable legislation

Case (Year)

Supreme Court Judgement

State of Bihar VS. Ka meshwar
Singh (1952)

It Invatldated the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950. It held that the provision
of the Act relating to the payment of compensation for the acquisition of
surplus land was only a pretension and not a reatlty.

K.C. Gajupatl Narayan Oeo

It upheld the validity of the Orissa Agrlcultural Income tax (Amendment)
Act, 1950. tt held that the Act was not 8 colourable legislation as It fell
within the legislative competency of the State legislature.

KT. Moopll Nair vs. State
of Kerala (1960)

In declared the Travancore eochln Land Tax Act, 1955 as Invalid. It
held that the Act violated Articles 14 and 19(1)(f) and Its provisions were
confiscatory In nature.

M.R. 8al8JI vs. State of Mysore

It declared the State order reserving 68 per cent of seats In educational Institutions to the backward class students as void. It held that
the execuUve order violated Article 15(4) and hence, was a fraud on the
Constitution.

vs. Stata of OrlSSI (1953)

(1962)

II IImportant Cases
The important cases relating to the doctrine
of colourable legislation and their judgements
are given in Table 91.4.

l DOCTRINE OF IMPLIED POWERS

Similarly, C. B. Pollock, whil e dealing 'w ith
th is doctrin e, said 32 : ~whenever anything
is authorized, and especiall y if, as matter
of duty, required to be done by law, and it
is found impossible to do that thing un less
something else not authorized in express
terms be also done, then that something wi ll
be supplied by necessary intendrpent. This
doctrine can be invoked in cases "where an
Act confers a j urisdict ion it also confers by
implication the power of doing all such acts,
or employing such means as are essen tia lly
necessary to its execution. H
H

II IMeaning of the Doctrine
The doctrine of implied powers is also
known as the doctrine of implication. This
doctrine is based on the maxim that "wh oever grants a thing is deemed also to grant
that without which the grant itself would be
of no effectH.
According to the Black's Law Dictionary,
the term "implied powerHmeans "a political
power that is not enumerated but that nonetheless exists because it is needed to carry out
an express powerH.
While defining the doctrine of implied
powers, Craies observed: "One of the first
principles of law wi.th regard to the effect of
an enabling act is that if a Legislature enables
something to be done, it gives power at the
same time by necessary im plication to do
everything which is indispensable for the
purpose of carrying out the purposes in view H.

!I IScope of the Doctrine
The Supreme Court has explained the scope
and effect of the doctrine of implied powers
in the fo llowing way33:
''The doctrine of impli ed powers can be
legitimately invoked when it is found
that a duty has been imposed or a powe r
conferred on an authority by a statute and
it is further found that the duty cannot
32Michaely Fenton and James Fraser vs. John Stephen,
Hemptoll (1858).
3J Bidi, Bidi LealJt:s and 7bbacco Merclumts Association
vs. State of Bombay ( 1961).

1m orton! Doctrines 0 Constitutionallnte retation

,

be discharged or the power cannot be
exercised at all unless some auxiliary or
incidental power is assumed to exist. In
such a casel in the absence of an implied
power the statute itself would become
impossible of compliance. The impossibility in question must be a general nature
as that the perfonnance of duty or the
exercise of power is rendered impossible
in all cases. It really means that the statutory provision would become a dead-letter
and cannot be enforced unless a subsidiary power is implied. n

g IApplication of the Doctrine
The Supreme Court has applied the doctrine
of implied powers in a number of constitutional cases. The important I among them,
are as follows:

\

I'•
,

rt

(,

)

In Gopal Chandra Misra case l 4 (1978)1
the Supreme Court held that a judge
of a State High Court has an implied
power under the provisions of Article
217 to revoke his resignation even after
his resignation letter has been received.
In Rupa Ashok Hurra case lS (2002), the

Supreme Court held that it has an implied
power (Le., inherent power) which enables
it to reconsider its own judgements. It suggested that a curative petition can be filed for
seeking reconsideration of a judgement that
has become final after dismissal of a review
petition under the provisions of Article 137.
It said that a curative petition is allowed in
order to cure a gross miscarriage of justice
and to prevent abuse of its process.
In Raja Ram Pal case l6 (2007), the Supreme
Court held that the Parliament has an implied
power under the provisions of Article 105 to
expel its members for its contempt.
In Sali! Sabhlok case" (2013), the Supreme
Court held that Article 316, which grants a
34 Vnion

of India vs. Gopal Chandra Misra (1978).

35Rupa Ashok Hurra vs. Ashok Hurra (2002).
J6 Raja Ram Pal vs. Speaker of the Lok Sabha (2007).
J7Stute of Punjab vs. Salil Sabhlok (2013 ).

659

State Governor the power to appoint the members of the State Public Service Commission
(SPSC), also grants the implied power to lay
down the procedures for such appointments.

El lDoctrine oflmplied Prohibition
The doctrine of implied prohibition is the
opposite of the doctrine of implied powers.
This doctrine is based on the maxim that
Nexpress mention of one thing implies the
exclusion of another".
The doctrine of implied prohibition is
applied in USA and Australia. In these federal countries, only the powers of the Central
Legislature are enumerated in the Constitution and the residuary powers have been
left to the State Legislature. This means that
there is an implied prohibition on the Central Legislature to make laws on the residuary subjects. However, this prohibition is
not applicable to those encroachments (on
the residuary powers of the State Legislature) which are incidental and ancillary to
the proper execution of the express powers
granted to the Central Legislature.
The doctrine of implied prohibition is
not applicable in India. In the Indian Constitution, the powers of both the Central
Legislature and the State Legislature have
been separately enumerated the Parliament
can leg'i slate on the subjects enumerated in
the Union List, Concurrent List and also on
the residuary subjects. On the other hand l a
State Legislature can legislate on the subjects
enumerated in the State List and Concurrent
List. However, the doctrine of incidental and
ancillary powers is applied in India also.

j

DOCTRINE OF INCIDENTAL
AND ANCILLARY POWERS

II IMeanin g of the Doctrine
The legislative powers of the Parliament
and the State Legislatures are mentioned in
the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution.
Every such power (i.e., expressly mentioned

660 (! Indian Polity
leg islative power) ca rries wit h it the inci·
den ta l or a ncillary powe r whi ch is necessary
to execute that powe r. In oth er words, th e
in cidental an d a n ci ll ary powe rs a re those
powers whi ch a re required to be exerc ised by
the leg islatures fo r the effec ti ve exerc ise of
leg islative powers expressly bestowed on th em
by the Co n sti tuti on. In USA38 , such powers
a re call ed as "necessary a nd proper powers"
while in Australia, they are described as "powers incidental to th e exec ution of that power".
Acco rding to thi s doct rin e, th e entr ies
enum erated in the three leg islati ve li sts a re
n ot to be read in a n arrow or restricted sense
a nd each genera l word in a n ent ry shou ld be
h eld to extend to a ll inc iden ta l or a ncill ary
ma tters wh ic h ca n fairl y an d reasona bl y be
co mprehended in it:l9. Hen ce, th e powe r to
levy tax would in cl ude the power to make pro·
visio ns fo r checkin g tax evas io n·lO • Simil arl y,
the powe r to legislate with res pect to co lI ec·
tion of ren t in cl udes the power to leg isla te
wi th respect to re mi ss ion of ren t.j l.
Howeve r, th e a bove log ic of wider in te rpre·
tat io n docs not mea n that the sco pe of th e
J8.yhe Ame rican Co nstitu tio n desc ribes the
incidental o r ancillary powers of the Congress in
the fo llowi ng way:
"Th ma ke all Laws which sha ll be necesSil ry
a nd pro pe r fo r carryin g into Execution the
fo rego ing Powe rs, a nd a ll other Powe rs vested by
thi s Co nsti tution in the Gove rn me n t of the Un ited
States o r in <Ill y Depa rt mcnt or Offi cer thereor '.
39J ustice Gajcndragadkar, while explain ing the
doctri ne of incide nta l a nd a nci lla ry powe rs, made
the fo llowin g observat ion:
It is a n elementa ry C<lrdina l rule ofillterprewlion
tlul( the words used in the Constitution which
confe r legislat ive powe r must recei ve the m UH
liberal co nstructio n a nd if they a rc lI'ords of I,·ide
amplitude, they must be interp re ted so as to give
effect to that a mplitude. It woul d be out of place to
p ut a Jl<lrrow or restricted construction Ull I"o rels of
wide a m pli tude in a Consti tut ion. A general 1V0rd
used in a ny entry ... must be construed to extend to
all a nci llary or subsidiary matters which can fai rly
and reasonabl y be held to be included in i t. ~
4uCa mm issioller of Co m m ercial Tcl.\·es vs. R 5. !!raver

( 1967) .
.jl Ull ired Provil1ces vs. A liqa BegulI1 ( 1941).

in cidental or a nci ll ary powe r can be extended
to any unreason a ble extent. I-Ience, the powe r
to levv tax cann ot be held to in cl ude th e
power' to co n fisca te goodS·12 .
Fu rther, thi s doctrin e ca nn ot be used as a
cloak for extendi ng the powe r of a legislature so
as to com prehend a subject whi ch is ex plicitly
men tioned in a list. For exa mple, the legislative
power in respect of ''bettin g and gambling" 1n
Entry 34 of the State List does not in cl ude the
power to impose taxes on betting and gambl ing
whi ch is expli Citl y mentioned as a separate
subj ect in Entry 62 of the State List".1.
Mo reove r, thi s doctr in e ca nnot be ex tended
to th e exe rcise of the legis lat ive power col our·
abl y or by fra ud on th e co nsti tut ion .

fli Rationale of the Doctrine
Th e Suprc me CO LIrt has founded the doctr ine
of incide nta l and an cill ary powers to relieve a
statute from its invalidi ty or un constilu tion al ·
it)'. The COLIn, whil e expla in ing the rationale of
the doctrin e, made the foll owing observation.j4:
"Th e co urts have a ppli ed the doctrin e of
"pith an d substa nce" il nd in some cases
the doctri ne of "in ci denta l" or "an cillary"
or "subsidia ry powe r" of th e legi slature
to uphold the law or to va lida te the law
declared by the courts as in valid. Thereo n,
o ne o f the doctrin es is a pplied when
the court fin ds tha t th e law in pith and
substa nce is with in the legislati ve com·
petell ce bu t in cidc nwll y tren ches upon
illl ot her subject of legislat ion. Equally,
the doctrin e of "ancill ary or subsidiary
power" of the leg islature is a pplied when
the co urt reco rds a findin g th at the
im pugn ed Act is substa ntially within the
legislati ve com petence, but in ciden ta lly it
tren ches upo n ano ther subject of legisla.
tion assig ned either to Parlia ment or the
Leg islature of a Statc as the case may be."

"Th e doctrin e of incidental or anci lla ry
power is fo unded upon the principle that

" Check POSI Officer vs. K.P. Alululla ( 1970 ).

41 R M .D. Clwmarbaugwal/a vs. Siale of My sore (1 961).

14
. S. S. Bola \' S . 8.D. Sardm!(l ( 1997) .

Important Doctrines of Constitutional Inter retation

661

Table 91.5

Important Cases Relating to the Doctrine of Incidental and Ancillary Powers

51 No.

Case (Year)

Supreme Court Judgement

1.

Chaturbhuj vs. Union of India
(1959)

II held that the power to impose tax includes power of raising revenue by
imposing licence fee.

2.

Rai Ramkrishna vs. State of
Bihar (1963)

II held Ihat the power to enact laws on a subject includes the power to
make a valid law retrospectively, if the existing law on the same subject is
declared as unconstitutional.

3.

Pathumma vs. State of
Kerala 11978)

It held that the power 10 enact laws in respect of ~money-Iending and
money-lenders; relief of agricultural indebtedness" includes power to
enact a law relaling to debt of agriculturists already paid by sale of property in execution of the decree and any measure to provide relief and
recompense.

State of Haryana vs. Sant Lal
(1993)

It held that the power to levy sales tax cannot be used to Include within
that law merely transporters of goods.

Godfrey Phillips India Limited
vs. State of U.P. (200S)

It held that the power to impose tax Includes all events concerning that
tax, unless an event is included in another list.

4.

5.

in a case where on the face of a statute,
it appears that the legislative subject falls
both in the Union as well as the State List,
but on a careful scrutiny it becomes clear
that it falls merely incidentally in one list
but substantially in another list. However,
it cannot be regarded as the case of substantial encroachment trespassing into
another field. The incidental encroachment, therefore, means that in enacting
a legislation, the legislature has not traversed beyond the legislative field allotted
to it by the arrangement of distribution
of powers in the respective entries in the
list concerned in the Seventh Schedule. ~

II IImportant Cases
T he important cases relating to the doctrine
of incidental and ancillary powers and their
judgements are given in Thble 91.5.

~ DOCTRINE OF PRECEDENT

II IMeaning of the Doctrine
The doctrine of precedent (or the doctrine of
stare deCisis) is an English doctrine. According to this doctrine, the lower courts are
bound by the decisions of the higher courts.

Therefore, in Britain, every court is bound by
the decisions of the House of Lords.
It is a settled principle of law that a judg·
ment, which has held the field for a long
time, should not be unsettled. The doctrine of
stare decisis is expressed in the maxim "stare
decisis et non quieta movere", which means
Uto stand by decisions and not to disturb what
is settled." Lord Coke aptly described this in
his classic English version as "those things
which have been so often adjudged ought to
rest in peace." The underlying logic of this
doctrine is to maintain consistency and avoid
uncertainty. The guiding philosophy is that a
view which has held the field for a long time
should not be disturbed only because another
. .IS pOSSI·ble. 45
VIew
The above point has been aptly described
by the former Chief Justice Chandrachud in
the following way46:
"It is sufficient for invoking the rule of
stare decisis that a certain decision was
arrived at on a question which arose or
was argued, no matter on what reason
the decision rests or what is the basis
of the decision. In other words, for the
~5Shanker Raju vs. Union of India (20n).
46Waman Rno vs. Union of India (1980).

662

:f'

',dio, Polity

purpose of applying the ru le of stare
decisis, it is unnecessary to enquire or
determine as to what was the rationale
of the earli er decision which is said to
operate as stare decisis. "

fl iBasis of the Doctrine
The doctrine of precedent has been incor·"
pOTated in Article 141 of the Constitution.
According to this provision, the law declared
by the Supreme Co urt shall be binding on all
courts within the territory of India. Hence, all
the courts and tribunals including the Hi gh
Courts in India are required to fol1ow the
decisions of the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court has explained the significance of Article 141 of the Constitution
in the following way47:

"When the Supreme Court decides a
principle it would be the duty of the
High Court or a subord in ate court to
follow the decision of the Supreme
Court. A judgement of the High court
wh ich refuses to follow the decision
and directions of the Supreme Court or
seeks to revive a decision of the High
Court which had been set aside by the
Supreme Court is a nullity."
According to the Supreme Court, it is
impermissible for the High Court to overrule
the decision of the Apex Court on the ground
that the Apex Court laid down the legal posi·
tion without considering any other point. The
Court further emphasized th at it is not only
a matter of judicial discipline for the High
Courts in India, but also a mandate of the
Constitution as provided in Article 141 that
the law declared by the Apex Court sha ll be
binding on all courts in the country48.
Apart from Article 141 of the Constitution,
the policy of courts is to stand by precedent
and not to disturb settled point. When court
has once laid down a principle of law as applicable to certain state of facts, it will adhere to
47Direcror o{Setrlemenrs, A.P. vs. M.R Apparao (2002)46Sugan rlti Stlresll Kumai' vs.lagdeeslum (2002).

that principle. and apply it to a ll future cases
where facts are substantially the same. A deliberate and solemn decision of court made after
argument on question oflaw fairl y arising in
the case, and necessary to its determination,
is an authority. or binding precedent in the
same court, or in other courts of equal or lower
rank in subsequent cases where the very point
9
is again in controvers/ .

II IRationale of the Doctrine
In the hierarchical system of courts which
exists in India, it is necessary for each lower
tier. including the High Courts, to accept
loyally the decisions of the higher tiers. It is
inevitable in a hierarchical system of courts
that there are decisions of the s upreme
appel1a te tribunal which do not attract the
unanimous approval of all members of the
judiciary. But the judicial system only works
if someone is allowed to have the last word
and that last word, once spoken, is loyally
accepted. The better wisdom of the court
below must yield to the higher wisdom of
the court above. That is the strength of the
50
hierarchical judicial system .
While explaining the rationale of the doctrine of precedent, the Supreme Court made
the fo11owing observation 5 ]:
"Consistency is the cornerstone of the
administration of justice. It is consistency which creates confidence in the
system and this consistency can never
be achieved without respect to the rule
of finality. It is with a view to achieve
consistency in judicial pronouncements, the courts have evolved the rule
of precedents, principle of stare decisis
etc. these rules and principles are based
on public policy and if these are not followed by courts then there will be chaos
in the administration of justice."
49K r is1ICna Kumar vs. UniOll of fndia (1990).
50 Ass istallt Collector of Central &cise vs. Dunlop
India Limited (1984).
51Governmcllr of Andl1Ya Pradesll vs. A.P. Jaiswa l
(2000).

Important Doar;nes of umstiWtionallnterpretotion

The doctrine of binding precedent has the
merit of promoting a certa inty and consis·
tency in judicial dec ision s, and enables an
organic development of the law. The Supreme
Court has enunciated the importance of the
doctrine in the development of jurisprudence
of law in the fol1owing way52:
"Thking note of the hi erarchical character of the judicial system in India,
it is of paramount importance that the
law declared by this Court should be
certain, clear and consistent. It is commonly known that most decisions of the
courts are of significance not merely
because they constitute an adjudication
on the rights of the parties and resolve
the dispute between them, but also
because in doing so they embody a declaration of law operating as a binding
prin Ciple in future cases. In this latte r
aspect lies their particular value in
developing the jurisprudence of the law."
While stating the importance of consistent
opinions in achieving harmony in the judicial system, the Supreme Court observed as
foBowS53 :
"It is true that in the system of justice
which is being administered by the
courts, one of the basic principles which
has to be kept in view, is that courts of
coordinate jurisdiction, should have
consistent opinions in respect of an
identical set of facts or on a question of
law. If courts express different opinions
on the identical sets of facts or question of law while. exercising the same
jurisdiction, then instead of achieving
harmony in the judicial system, it will
lead to judicial anarchy."
When a position in law is weB-settled as a
resu1t of the judicial pronouncements of the
Supreme Court, it would amount to judicial
impropriety on the part of subordinate courts
52Un ion of India vs. Raghubir Singh (1989).
SlHari Singh vs. State of Haryana ( 1993 ).

~ 663

including the High Courts to ignore the
setded decisions and then to pass a judicial
order which is clearly contrary to the settled
legal position. The Supreme Court, in thi s
context, observed as fo11ows 54 :
"Such judicial adventurism cannot be
permitted and we strongly deprecate
the tendency of the subordinate courts
in not applying the settled principles
and in passing whimsical orders which
necessa ril y has the effect of granting
wrongful and unwarrant ed reli ed to
one of the parties. It is time that this
tendency stops."
The Supreme Court ca utioned that, '\h e
judgments of this court are decisional
betwee n litigants but declarator y for the
nation." This court further observed55 :
"Enlightened Iitigative policy in the country must accept as final the pronouncements of this court unless the subject
be of such fundamental importance to
national life or the reasoning is so plain ly
erroneous in the light oflater thought that
it is wiser to be ultimately right rather
than to be consistently wrong. Stare decisis is not a ritual of convenience but a
rule with limited exceptions." .

t DOCTRINE OF OCCUPIED FIELD

III Meaning of the Doctrine
The doctrine of occupied field says that when
the Parliament enacts a law on a particular
subject and thereby occupies the field, a State
Legislature will not have authority to make
any law on that field. rn other words, according to this doctrine, when a legislative field
is already occupied by a central legislation,
there would be no scope for a state legislation
in that field. This doctrine is also known as
the doctrine of covered field.
54 Dwarikesl1 Sugar Industries Limited vs. Prem Heavy

Engineering Works Limited ( 1997).
!>SCanga Sugar Corporation vs. State of U.P. ( 1979).

664 ,~ Indian Polity
If the matter is within the exclusive compete nce of the Parli a m e nt i.e., Union List ( List
1), then th e State Legisla ture is prohibited to
S6
make any law with regard to the sa me • Simila rl y, if any matter is within the exclus ive
co mp ete nce of the State Legislatu re i.e., State
Li st (Li st H) , th en it becomes a prohibited
tield for the Pariia men tS7 . On the othe r hand,
if the matter is enumerated in th e Concurre nt List (L ist Ill ), then both the Pa rliament
as well as the State Legislature will h ave the
co m petence to make th e law.
There may be a si tuat ion whe re a State
Legi slature is making a law on a matter enumerated in the Co ncu rrent List, it may not ice
that the legislati ve field is already occupied
by a law of th e Pa rli ament.
T herefore, the doctrin e of occupied field is
relevant in the case of laws made with refer58
e nce to ent ries in the Concur rent List . In
other words, the doctri n e of occupied field
can be a ppli ed onl y to the entries of the Concurre nt List59 .
It mu st be noted he re that the doctrin e of
occupied fie ld or igi nates from Article 254
wh ich deals with the in co ns istency (repugna n cy) between laws made by the Parliament
an d th e Sta te Legislature.

11 \Doctri ne of Re pugnancy
Articl e 254 decla res that in case of any incons istency between a parliamenta ry: law and a
state law in respect of matters e numerated in
th e Concurrent List, the parliamentary law
shall prevail and the state law sha ll be vo id
to the exten t of repugnancy.
According to the Supreme Court, the repugnancy between the two laws m ay be asce r60
tained on the following three principles:
( i) Direct Conflict whether there is direc t
co nflict betwee n the two provisions;
Sfl Hindustan Lever vs. State of Maltaraslttra ( 2003).
571bid.
58Ib id.
59State of Rajasthan vs. Vatan Medical and General
Sto re (2001).
6IJDeep Ciland vs. State of U.P. ( 1959 ) .

(ii) Intended Occupation whether Parliament
inte nded to lay down an ex haustive
code in respect of the subj ect-matte r
rep laci ng the Act of the Sta te legislat ure; a nd
(iii) Occup ie d Field wheth er the law mad e
by Parli a me nt and the law made by
th e Sta te leg islatu re occupied the sa me
fie ld.
I n orde r to determine the question of
re pu gna n cy between t h e t wo laws, Ih e
61
Supre me Co urt la id down the fo llowing tests
( pro positions):
1. It must be shown that the two enactments
conta in in co nsistent a nd irreco n cilabl e
provisions so tha t they ca nn ot sta nd
together or operate in th e sa me field.
2 . T here can be no repeal by impli cation
un less the inco nsistency appears on tl'te
face of the two statutes.
3 . Where the two statutes occupy a pa rticular fi e ld , but there is room or poss ibility of both th e statutes operating in the
sa me fie ld without com ing in to collis ion with each other, n o repugna n cy
results.
4. Where the re is no in cons istency but a
statute occupyi ng the same fie ld seeks
to create di stri ct a nd separate offences,
no question of rep ugna ncy arises and
both the statutes continue to operate in
th e sa me fie ld.
Art icle 254 a lso contai n s a n except ion
to the above rul e of repugnancy. It says
that if th e state law has been reserved for
the co n sideration of th e President and ha s
received h is asse nt , then the state law shall
preva il over t h e pa rli ame ntary law and
operates in that sta te as val id law. Howeve r,
the parliament may aga in supe rsede the
state law (whi ch h as bee n assented to by
the Pres ide nt ) by subsequ ently e n acting a
law o n the sa me matter. If the Parl ia me n t
e nacts suc h a law, then the sta te law wo ul d
be void to th e extent of rep ugnancy with the
parli a mentary law.
61 M. Kanll1anidlli

vs. Unio n of India ( 1979).

f

Important Doctrines

01 1Repugnancy
Outside the Concurrent
List

The question of repugnancy between the Par·
liamentary legislation and State legislation
arises in two ways. First, where the legislations, though enacted with respect to matters
in their a110tted spheres, overlap and conflict.
Second, where the two legislations are with
respect to matters in the Concurrent List and
there is a conflict. In both the situations, the
Parliamentary legislation will predominate,
in the first, by virtue of non-obstante clause
in Article 246(1~; in the second, by reason of
Article 254 (1). 2
The Supreme Court has further explained
the above points of repugnancy in the following way63:
"The question of repugnancy under
Article 254 (1) between a law made by
Parliament and a law made by the State
Legislature arises only in case both the
legislations occupy the same field with
respect to one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List, and there
is direct conflict between the two laws.
It is only when both these requirements
are fulfilled that the State law will, to
the extent of repugnancy become void.
Article 254(1) has no application to cases
of repugnancy due to overlapping found
between List II on the one hand and List
I and List IlIon the other. If such overlapping exists in any particular case, the
State law will be ultra vires because of the
non-obstante clause in Article 246(1). ~

DOCTRINE OF PROSPECTIVE
OVERRULING

IIIMeaning of the Doctrine
The doctrine of prospective overruling is an
American doctrine. It was applied in India
62State of Kerala vs. Mis Mar Appraem Kun' Company
Limited (2012).
63Hoechst Pharmaceuticals Limited vs. Stare of Bihar
(1983).

or Constftutionollnterpretation ~, 665

for the first time by the Supreme Court in the
Go/ak Na t11 case64 (1967).
When a court overrules its earlier decision
and announces a new ruling, it can restrict
the application of the new ruling only to
the future transactions so that the validity
of the past transactions is not affected. This
is known as the doctrine of prospective overruling. In other words, this doctrine enables
a court to overrule an old precedent (stare
decisis) from a future date only and not retrospectively.

In the Golak Nath case" (1967), the
Supreme Court overruled its earlier verdicts delivered in the Shankari Prasad case 66
(1951) as well as in the Sajjan Singh case67
(1964). In both the cases, the Supreme Court
held that the Parliament's amending power
under Article 368 also includes the power
to amend the fundamental rights guaranteed in Part III of the constitution. Hence,
a constitution~l amendment act enacted to
abridge or take away the fundamental rights
is not void under Article 13(2). Later, in the
Golak Nath case 68 (1967), the Supreme Court
held that the amending power under Article
368 can not be used to abridge or take away
the fundamental rights and a constitutional
amendment act is "law" within the meaning of Article 13(2). But, the Supreme Court
applied the doctrine of prospective overruling
and declared that this decision will have only
prospective operation and not retrospective
operation. This means that the Parliament
will have no power from the date of this decision to amend any of the provisions of Part
III of the Constitution so as to abridge or
take away the fundamental rights enshrined
therein. Further, the First Amendment Act,
1951, the Fourth Amendment Act, 1955 and
the Seventeenth Amendment Act, 1964 will
continue to be valid for the future.
64I. C. Go/ak Nath vs. Stare of Punjab ( 1967).
65 fb id.
66 S hankari Prasad Si ngh vs. Union of India (1951).
67Sajjan Singh vs. State of Rajasthan (1964).
68J.e. Golak Nath vs. State of Punjab (1967).

666

P'

Indian Polity

ti lFormulation of the Doctrine
The Supreme Court negatived th e co ntenti on
in Golak Nath case69 ( 1967) that prospect ive
overrul ing amounts to judicial leg islation.
Explaining the Blackston ian theory oflaw, i.e.,
Judge discovers law a nd docs not make law,
and the effic acy of prospective overruling, the
70
cou rt made the following observation :
"The doctrin e of 'prospective overruling'
is a modem doctrin e and is suitabl e for a
fast moving society. It does not do away
with the doctrine of SLue decisis, but confines it to past transactions. It is true that
in one sen se the court only decla res the
law, either customary or statutory or per. son al law. While in strict theory, it may
be sa id that the doctrin e involves the
making of law, what the court really does
is to declare the law but refuses to give
retroactivity to it. It is rea ll y a pragmat ic
solution recon ciling the two co nflicting
doctrines, namel y, that a court finds the
law and that it does make the law. It
finds the law but restricts its operation
to the future. It enables the court to bring
about a smooth transition by correcting
its errors without disturbing the impact
of those errors on the past transactions.
It is left to the discretion of the court to
prescribe the limits of the retroactivity
and thereby the · doctrine enables the
court to mould the reli ef to meet the
ends of justice. By the application of this
doctrine, the past may be preserved and
the future protected~.

II IBasis of the Doctrine
The Supreme Court explained the legal and
constitutional basis of the doctrine of prospective overruling in th e following way71:
uin India, there is no statutory prohibition
against the co urt refusing to give retroactivity to the law declared by it. Indeed,
69[bid.
7Olbid.
71 Ibid.

the doctr ine of res-judicata precl udes
any scope for retroactivity in respect of
a subject-m atter that has been finally
decided between the parties. Further, the
Indian court by interpretation rej ect retroactivity to statutory provisions though
couched in general tenns on the ground
that they affect vested ri ghts, the present
case only attempts a further exten sion of
the said ru le aga inst retroactivity.
Our Con stitution does not expressly or
by necessary impli cation spea k aga inst
the doctrin e of prospecti ve overruling.
Indeed, Articles 32, 141 and 142 are
couched in such wide and elastic te rm s
as to enable this co urt to formulate legal
doctrines to meet the ends of justice .
The only limitation thereon is reaso n,
restra int and injustice. Under Art icle
32, for the enforcement of the fundamental rights, the Supreme Cou rt has
the power to issue suitable directions or
orders or writs. Article 141 says that the
law declared by th e Suprem e Court shall
be binding on all courts; an d Article
142 enables it, in the exercise of its jurisdiction, to pass such decree or make such
order as is n ecessary for doing compl ete
justice in any ca use or matter pending
before it. These articles are design edly
ma de co mprehen sive to enab le the
Supreme Court to declare law and to give
such directions or pass such orders as are
necessary to do complete justice.
The ~x press ion 'decla red' is wider
than the words 'found or made'. Tb
declare is to announce opinion. Indeed,
the latter involves the process, while the
former expresses result. Interpretation ,
ascertainment and evolution are parts
of the process, while that interpreted,
ascertained or evolved is decla red as
law. The law declared by the Su preme
Court is the law of the land. If so, there
is no acceptable reason why the court,
in decla ring the law in supersessio n
of the law declared by it earlier, could
not rest ri ct the operation of the law,
as declared, to the future and save the

Imbortant Doctrines o(Constftutionallnterbretation

transactions, whether statutory or oth·
erwise, that were effected on th e ba sis
of the ea rlier law. 1b de ny this power
to the Suprem e Court on the basis of
som e outmoded theory that the co urt
on1y finds law but does not make it is
to make ineffecti ve the powerful in stru·
ment of justice placed in the hands of
the highest judiciary of thi s coun try."

IIIPropositions of the Doctrine
Th e Supreme Court laid down three proposi.
tions with respect to the doctrine of prospec·
tive overruling. The courtl in this context,
observed as follows 72 ;
thi s co urt for the first time ha s
bee n called upon to appl y th e doctrine
evo lved in a differe nt country, under
different circum sta n ces, it would like to
move wari ly in the beginning and wou ld
lay down the following proposition s:
~As

(1) The doctrine of prospective overru ling can be invoked onl y in matte rs
aris in g under our Con stitution ;
(2) it an be app li ed onl y by the highest co urt of th e co untry, i. e., the
Supreme Court as it has the consti·
tutional jurisdiction to decla re a law
binding on a ll the courts in India;
(3) the scope of the retroactive operation
of the law declared by the Supreme
Court superseding its earlier deci·
sions is left to its discretion to be
moulded in accordance with the justice of the ca use or matter before it."

El l Rationale of the Doctrine
The Supreme Court has explained the rationale of th e application of the doct rine of
3
prospective overruling in the following
:

wal

UWe have arri ved at two conclusion s,
namely, (1) Parliament has no power to
amend Part III of the Constitution so as
to take away or abridge the fundamental
12 1b id.

73lbid.

l:i 667

righ ts; a nd (2) this is a fit case to invoke
and apply the doctrine of prospective
overruling. What then is th e effect of our
conclusion on the ins1.,1 nt case? Having
regard to the history of the amendments,
their impact on the socia} and economic
affairs of our country, and the chaoti c
situation that may be brought about by
the sudde n withdrawal a t this stage of the
amendments from the Con stitution , we
think that co nsiderable judicial restra int
is called for. We, therefore, declare that our
decisio n will not affect the validity of the
Constitution (Seventee nth Amendment)
Act, 1964, or other amendments made to
the Constitution taking away or abridg.
ing the fundam ental rights". We furthe r
declare that in future Parliament wi1l
have no power to amend Part III of the
Co nstitution so as to take away or abridge
the fundamen ta l rights".
According to the Supre me Court :
1. The prospective declaration of law is a
devise innovated by the apex court to
avoid reopening of settl ed issues and to
preve nt multiplicity of proceedings.
2 . It is also a dev ise adopted to avoid uncer·
tainty and avoidabl e litigat ion.
3. By the very object of prospective declaration oftaw, it is deeme d that a ll act ion s
take n contrary to the de claration of law
prior to its date of declaration arc vali·
da ted. Thi s is done in the larger public
in terest.

"

mi lCriticism of the Doctrine
While considering the various argum e nts
made aga inst the application of the doctrine
of prospective ove rruling, the Supreme Court
made the following observation 75;
"Let us now consider so me of the objec·
tions to this doctrine. T he objections are:
( 1) the doctrine involved legislation by
courts; (2) it would not en courage parties
to prefer appeals as they would not get

14Baburam vs. e.e. Jacob ( 1999) .
7"1.e. Go/uk Na th vs. Sta te of PUlljab ( 1967).

668

fJ

Indian Polity

any benefit therefrom; (3) the declaration foc the futuTe would only be obiter,
(4) it is not a desirable change; and (5)
the doctrine of retroactivity serves as a
brake on court which otherwise might
be tempted to be so fascile in overruling.
But in our view, these objections are not
insurmountable. If a court can overrule
its earHer decision, there cannot be any
dispute, when the court can do so, there
cannot be any valid reason why it should
not restrict its ruling to the future and
not to the past. Even if the party filing
an appeal may not be benefited by it, in
simllar appeals which he/she may file
after the change in the law he/she will
have the bene'fit. The decision cannot be
obiter for what the court in effect does
is to declare the law but on the basis of
another d'octrine restricts its scope. Stability in law does not mean that injustice
shall be perpetuated.~

El lContinuation of the Doctrine
It must be noted here that even though the

judgement delivered in the Golak Nath case76
(1967) was overruled in the Kesavananda
Bharati case" (1973), the dQctrine of pros peetive overruling was upheld and fonowed in
several subsequent judgements.
Moreover, the Supreme Court has also
ext.ended the application of the doctrine to
the matters arising under the ordinary statutes as welL
The judgement in Mandal case 78 (1992)
postponing the operation for five years from
the date of the judgment is an instance of,
and an extension to the principle of pros pective overruling.
In Karunakar case 79 (1993), the Supreme
Court held that benefit of the decisions would
be given only to the parties to the cases pending before the authorities from the date of the
76 1bid.
77Kesavananda Bharati vs. State of Kerala (1973).
78 1ndra Sawhney vs. Ullion of India (1992)79Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad vs. B. Kan.makar
(1993).

judgment but not to the actions already taken
by the date of that judgment.

DOCTRINE OF HARMONIOUS
CONSTRUCTION

II IMeaning of the Doctrine
When different provisions of the constitution
are found to be in conflict with each other,
the courts should interpret them harmoniously so as to avoid the conflictual implications between them. This is known as the
doctrine of harmonious construction. This
doctrine is also called as the rule of avoidance of conflict.
While explaining the doctrine of harmon ious construction, Justice Venkatraama Aiyar
observed80 : "In case of two irreconcilable
provisions, they should be so interpreted that
effect can be given to both and none of the
two is rendered nugatory~.
Similarly, Justice Mukherjea said 81 : "If
certain provisions in the constitution appear
to be in conflict with each other, these provisions should be interpreted so as to effect a
reconciliation between them so that, if possible, effect could be given to all".
The doctrine of harmonious construction
should be understood in the light of the following points:
1. The court should read the constitution as
a whole and take into consideration its
different parts.
2. The court should proceed on the presumption that no conflict (between the
different parts) was intended by the
con sti tu t ion-makers.

II IApplication of the Doctrine
The Supreme Court has applied the doctrine
of harmonious construction to reconcile the
conflict:
1. Between the fundamental rights and
directive principles of state policy;
2 . Between different fundamental rights;

t,

I

I
•
\

!

I
;

I

,I
I

,•

SOSri Venkataramana Devarn vs. State of MysQre (1957).
8IA.K. Gopalan vs. State of Madras (1950).

i

\

Importont Doctrines of (onstitutionollnterpretotion

i

\
1

I.

lI

,\

,
\

)

.t

Similarly, the Supreme Court, while applying the doctrine of harmonious construction
to the ,interpretation of the different entries
of the legislative lists in the Seventh Schedule,
made the following observation 84 :

}

"It is also well settled that widest ampli.

rj

1

r', i

~.

g IImportant Cases
The important cases relating to the doctrine
of harmonious construction and their judge·
ments are given in Table 91.6.

DOCTRINE OF LIBERAL
INTERPRETATION

II IMeaning of the Doctrine
According to the doctrine of liberal interpre·
tation, the constitution must be interpreted
in a broad and liberal manner and not in a
narrow or pedantic sense. In other words, a
broad and liberal spirit should inspire the
interpreters of the constitution.
The doctrine of liberal interpretation
envisages that the constitution should be
interpreted not as a mere law but as the
machinery by which the laws are to be made.
It assumes that the constitution is a living
and organic thing and hence, it must be
interpreted broadly and liberally.
While explaining the doctrine of liberal
interpretation, Justice Higgins made the fol·
lowing obsenr ation 85 :

tude should be given to the language of
the entries, but some of the entries in

82R(mjan Dwivedi vs. Union of India (1983).
8JKesavanallda BI/arati vs. State of Kerala (1973).
84Calcutta Gas Co. vs. State of West Bengal (1962).

"

the different lists or in the same 1ist may
overlap and sometimes may also appear
to be in direct conflict with each other. It
is then the duty of this Court to reconcile
the entries and bring about harmony
between them. In this way it may, in
most cases, be found possible to arrive at
a reasonable and practical construction
of the language of the sections, so as to
reconcile the respective powers they con·
tain and to give effect to all of them. It is
only when such a reconciliation proves
impossible, then, and only then, should
the overriding power of the Union legis·
lature, the non·obstante clause, operate
and the Union power prevail."

3. Between fundamental rights and legislative privileges;
4. Bet~~een fundamental rights and amendment procedure;
5. Between fundamental rights and other
parts of the constitution; and
6. Between different entries of the legislative
lists in the seventh schedule.
The Supreme Court, on the application of
the doctrine of harmonious construction to the
fundamental rights and directive principles of
state policy so as to give effect to both as much
as possible, made the following observation 62 ;
"Although in earlier decision the court
paid scant regard to the directives on
the ground that the courts had little to
do with them since they were not justiciable or enforceable like the fundamental rights, the duty of court in relation
to the directives came to be emphasized
in the later decision which reached its
culmination in the Kesavananda Bharati
casell3 (1973) laying down certain broad
propositions. Law of these is that there
is no disharmony between the directives
and the fundamental rights because they
supplement each other on aiming at the
same goal of bringing about a social
revolution and the establishment of a
welfare state, which is envisaged in the
preamble. The courts, therefore, have
responsibility in so interpreting th e
Constitution as to ensure implementa.
tion of the directives and to harmonise
the social objective underlying the directives with individual rights."

~ 669

"Although we are to interpret the words
of the Constitution on the same principles of interpretation as we apply to
85

Attorney-General for New South Wales vs. Breweny
Employees Union ( 1908).

670

,r;J Indian Polity

Ta ble 91.6
51. No.

1.

2.

Important Cases Relating to the Doctrine of Harmonious Construction

Case (Year)

Supreme Court Judgement

Sri Venkalaramana Oevaru

vs. State of Mysore (1957)

11 ruled that the rIght of a religious denomination to manage its own affairs
In matters of religion under Article 26(b) Is subject to Article 2S(2)(b).

M.S.M. Sharma 'IS. Krishr:a
Sinha (1958)

It held that the fundamental rlghllo freedom of speech and expression
under Article 19(1)(8) is to be read subject to the privileges of House of
Legislature guaranteed by Article 194(3).

3.

O.N. Mohindroo vs. Bar
Council of Delhi (1968)

It held that the Parliament Is exclusively empowered to legislative with
respect to persons entitled to practice before the Supreme Court and
the High Court, and the power to legislate with respect to the rest of the
practitioners falls under the Concurrent list.

4.

D.A.V. College vs. State of
Punjab (1971)

It held that no State has the legislative competence to prescribe any
particular medium of Instruction with respect to higher e ducation. If It Interferes with the power of Parliament under Union list.

5.

Kesavananda Bharali vs.
Stale of Kerala (1973)

It held that the word -law- in Article 13(2) Includes only the ordinary laws
and not the amendment acts made under Article 368.

any ordinary law, these very principles
of interpretation co mpel us to take into
'Iccount the na ture and sco pe o f th e
Act we are interpreting-to reme mbe r
that it is a Co nsti tution , a mechanism
under which laws a re to be made, and
not a mere Act whi ch declares what the
law is to be."
The Supreme Court has exp la ined th e doctrine of liberal interpretation in the fonowing
way86:
"A con sti tutional provision is never static,
it is ever evolving and ever changing a nd,
therefore, does not admit of a narrow,
pedantic or syllogistic approach. It seems
well settled that constitutional provisions
must rece ive a broad interpretHion and
the scope and ambit of such provisions,
a nd in parti cu lar th e Fundame ntal
rights, shou ld not be cut down by too
astute or too rest ricted an approach".

Seve n th Schedul e of the Co nst itution, th e
Supre me Cou rt observed as foll ows61 :
rule of interpretation is
that the entries in the leg islative li sts are
not to be read in a narrow or restricted
se nse and that eac h ge neral word should
be held to extend to all a nci ll ary or
subsidiary matters which ca n fairly and
reasonab ly be said to be comprehended
in it. The widest possibl e co nstructi o n ,
according to the ordinary mea ning of
the words in the entry, mu st be put
upon them . In construing the words in
a constitutional document co nferr ing
legislative power the most liberal co nstruction should be put upon the words
so that the sa me may have effect in their
widest amplitude."
~Th e c~Hdina l

fl lDoctrine of Literal Interpretation

With respect to the application of the doctrine of 1iberal interpretation to the entries
enumerated in the legislative lists under the

The doctrine of literal interpretation is also
known as the doctrine of strict construction
or the doctrine of pos itivist construction.
According to this doct rin e, the provisions

OOLife Immrllllce Corporation of India vs. MmwbllOi D.
S/lal! ( 1992).

87Elef Hotels wul Investments Limifed vs. Unio n of
India ( 1989).

Important Doctrines ofConstitutionollnterpretotion

f

of the constitution should be expounded in
their plain, ordinary, n atural and grammatical meaning.
While laying down the doctrine of literal
interpretation, Justice Mukherjea sa id88 : "In
interpreting the provisions of our co nstitution, we should go by th e plain words used
by the constitution-makers".
,!he doctrine of literal interpretation says
that the Constitution must be interpreted with
reference to its terms and those alone; nothing
is to be read into it on grounds of some supposed spirit pervading the Constitution, or on
the ground of policy or even for the purpose of
supply ing omissions or of correcti ng errors89 .
Th e Suprem e Court, in the above co ntext,
made the follo'w ing observation 90 :
"Th e courts are not at liberty to declare
an Act void because in their opinion it is
opposed to a spirit supposed to pervade
th e Constitution but not expressed in
words. Where the fundam ental law has
not limited, either in terms or by necessary impli cation, the general powers
co nferred upon the Legislature, courts
cannot declare a limitation upon the
motion of having discove red so mething
in the spirit ofthe Con stitution which is
not even mentioned in the statute. It is
difficult upon any general principles to
limit the omnipotence of the sovereign
legislative power by judicial interpretation, except so far as the express words
of a written Constitu t ion gi ve that
authority."

II IDoctrine of Purposive Interpretation
The doctrine of purposive interpretation says
that the courts, while making an interpretation of the Constitution, should look into the
purpose for incorporating a provision in the
Con.st itution . It emphasizes that the co nsti88Chiranjit Lal Chowdhary vs. Un ion of Jndia ( 1950 ).
09 1n

Presidentia l Reference to the Supreme Court
with respect to the Sea Customs Act in J 963.
90AX Gopalan vs. State of Madras ( 1950).

~, 671

tution al interpreta tion sho uld ascertain the
inte ntion of the makers of th e Constitution.
The Preamble to the Con st ituti o n and
the Con stituent Asse mbly Debates throws a
light on the purposes of the con stitutional
provisions and the intent of the constitutionmakers. Sir Alladi Krishn aswam y Ayyar, a
m ember of the Drafting Committee of the
Con sti tuent Assembly sa id: "The Preambl e
to our Co n stitution expresses what we h ad
thought or dreamt so long". Similarly, in the
91
Berubari Un ion case (1960), th e Supreme
Court sa id that the Preamble is a key to th e
minds of the makers of the Con stitution.
While making an argument in fa vo ur
of the doctrin e of purposive interpretation,
the Suprem e Co urt mad e the following
observation 92 :
"Con stitutional provisions are required
to be understood and interpreted with
an object-oriented approach. A Co nst itution must not be co n strued in a
narrow and pedantic sen se. The words
used may be general in terms but, their
full import and true meaning, has to be
a ppreciated con sidering the true context
in which the same are used and the purpose which they seek to achieve."
Si milarly, the former Chief Justice of India,
J .S. Verma, while advocating the doctrine of
purposive interpretation, sa id as fo11ows 93 :
"Th e Co nstitution is to be inte rpreted
as a livin g and vibrant organism to
provide for the current societal needs.
Constitution is to b e con strued as ena cting concepts. In constr uing a provision
of the Constitution, the constitutional
purpose it is meant to subserve has to
be borne in mind. "

Presidential Reference to the Supreme Court
with respect to the Berubari Union and Exchange
of Enclaves in 1960.
92S.R. Chaudhuri vs. State of Punjab (2001 ).
93 J .S. Verma, New Dimensions of Justice, Universa l,
2000, pp. J -2.
9 11n

672

P

Indian Polity

II IDoctrine of Creative Interpretation
The doct rine of creative interpretation e n visages an innovative judicial interpretation of
the provi sions of th e Co nstitution . Thi s doctri ne says that the cou rts sho uld evolve new
co ncepts and new procedures in o rde r to m eet
the requi rem e nts of the changing situations.
The judge men t deli vered by the Su preme
Co urt in th e Golak Na tIl case 94 ( 1967) is an
important illu stration of the doctri ne of creati ve interp reta tion .
In this case, the Supre m e Court e mbarked
o n a creat ive role by introdu ci n g for the
first t ime in India the Ameri ca n doctrine
of prospective overrulin g. According to thi s
doc t ri ne, a n o ld precedent (stare dec is is)
ca n be overrul ed from a future da te and n ot
retrospective ly.
While asse rt ing a creati ve role for itse lf
in th e Golak Nath case 95 ( 1967), the Sup re m e
Court made the fo ll owing observation :
"Articles 32, 141 and 142 a rc cou ched in
such wide and elastic term s as to enable
94/.G. Golak Natl! \'s. Sf(lte of PlIlljab ( 1967).
95Ibid.

this Court to formu late legal doctrines to
meet the e nd s of justi ce. 1b deny thi s
power to th e Suprem e Co urt o n the
bas is of some outmoded th eory t hat
the Court on ly finds t he law but does
n ot make it is to make in effect ive th e
powerful in st rument of justi ce placed
in the hands of the hi ghest judiciary of
thi s country."
Anoth er Sig ni ficant mani festation of the
doctrine of c reat ive in terp re tation is the
judge m ent de live red by the Supreme Court
in t he Kesava llallda Bhara ti case 96 (1973). I n
this case, the Sup re me Court innova ted a n ew
con stitutional doctri ne ca lled ' the doctrin e of
ba sic str ucture of the con stitution'. In fact,
thi s judgement is rega rded as t he water-mark
of the judi cia l creati vity i n Indi a.
96KesltVallCII1da Bliarari \'5. State of Kerala ( 1973).

[,_In_lh_is_pa~M~.'

J

___________________________________.
_ 92. World Constitutions

I

CHAPTE~II

92 World Constitutions

t AMERICAN CONSTITUTION
The American Constitution is the Constitu·
tion of the United States of America which
was formed in 1787 fol1owing the American
Revolution (1775-1783). The Constitution was
adopted in 1787 at the Philadelphia Convention and came into force in 1789. The salient
features of the American Constitution are
explained as follows:

I. W ritten Constitution The American Constitution is usually cited as a c1assic example of
a written Constitution. In fact, it is the oldest '
among the existing written Constitutions of
the world. It is contained in a document of
some 12 pages and consists of a Preamble,
7 Articles and 27 Amendments.
2. Rigid Constitution Unlike the British Constitution, the American Constitution is a rigid
one. It cannot be amended by the Congress
in the same manner as the ordinary laws are
made. It can be amended by the Congress only
by means of a special process provided by the
Constitution for that purpose. Therefore, in
the USA, there exists a distinction between a
constitutional law and an ordinary law.
The American Constitution, the most rigid
constitution in the worJd, lays down the following two methods for its amendment:
(i) An amendment can be proposed by twothird votes of both the Houses of the
Congress. It should be ratified by the

legislatures of three-fourths (38 out of
50) of the states within a seven-year
time span.
eii) A1ternatively, an amendment can be proposed by a constitutional convention
called by the Congress on the petition
of two·thirds (34 out of 50) of the state
legislatures. It should be ratified by the
convention in three-fourths (38 out of 50)
of state legislatures.
Hence, the procedure prescribed by the
American Constitution for its amendment is
very difficult, complicated and slow. Its rigid
character is evident from the fact that it has
been amended on ly 27 times since its promulgation in 1789.
3. Federal Const it uti on USA is a federal
state. In fact, the USA is the first and the oldest federal state in the modern world. It is a
federal republic comprising 50 states (originally 13 states) and the District of Columbia.
The Constitution provides for division ofpowers
between the Federal (Central) Government and
the State Governments. It confers limited and
specified powers on the Centre and vests the
residuary powers (which are not enumerated
in the Constitution) in the States. Each state
has its own Constitution, elected legislature,
governor and Supreme Court.
4. Presidential Government Unlike the British
Constitution, the American Constitution provides

674

P

Indian Polity

for the Presid en tial fonn of Gover nment . Th e
featur es o f the Amer ica n Presid en ti al syste m of
Gover nm ent are as follows:
( i) The Am e rica n Presid ent is both, t he head
of Sta te and t he head of Gover nme n t.
As the head of State, h e/ she occ up ies
a ce remon ial posit io n . As the head of
Gover nment , he/ she leads the execu tive
orga n of Gover n m e nt. The Pres ident o f
the USA is the c hief rea l execu ti ve.
(ii) The Presid ent is e lected by an e lector al
co ll ege for a fixed te n ure of four years.
He / s he ca nn ot be remo ved by th e
Co ngress exce pt by impea c hm ent fo r a
grave un co nsti t uti ona l a ct.
(i ii) The Presid ent gove rn s with the help of
the Ca bin et or a small er body ca ll ed
' Kitc he n' Ca bin et. It is o nly an adv iso ry
body a nd co ns ists of non-e lected de partment-, I secret aries. They a re se lected and
appoi nted by him / he r and are respon sibl e on ly to him / her. They ca n also be
remov ed by him / he r a ny t im c.
(iv) The Pres id e nt an d hi s / her Sec retari es
are n ot respo n si bl c to t he Co ngress fo r
their acts. They ne ith e r posse ss m embe rship in th e Co ngres s n o r atte n d its
sess io n s.
(v) The Pres ident ca nn o t dissol ve the House
of Re p rese ntativ es - th e lowe r House of
the Co ngress .
5. Separ ation of Powe rs T h e doc trin e of
sepa rat ion o f po we rs is t h e ba s is of th e
Am er ican con stitu t ion a l syste m. T he legisla tive, execu tive a nd judi cia l powe rs of the
Gover n m e nt are separa lCd a nd vested in th e
threc ind e pe nd e nt o rga ns or the Gover n me n t.
The first three articl es o f the Const itutio n
clearl y manifest thi s feat ure of t he Const ituti o n . Art icl e I says t hat a ll legis la tive power s
he re in gnlllte d shall be vested in the Cong ress.
Art icle " states that t he execu ti ve powers
sh all be vested in th e Pres iden t. Articl e III
provid es that the judici al power s sha ll be
ves ted in o n e Supre m e Court a n d in suc h
in fer ior co u rts as t he Cong ress m ay from
ti me to time ordain a nd establ ish.

6. Check s and Balan ces The syste m of c hecks
and bala nces in the Amer ican Co nstitu ti o n is
a n outco m e of the adopt ion of th e prin cipl e
of se parati on of power s. I t e nab les each orga n
of t he Gove rnm ent to exerci se partia l co ntro l
o n others so that no o rga n beco m es a u tocrat ic
and irresp o ns ibl e. Thi s mea n s that no organ
of Gover nm e nt ha s unres tri cted powe rs cven
in its own spher e.
So me aspect s of the worki n g of the system
of check s and ba la nces in th e Amer ica n Co n·
st itution al syste m are:
(i) Th e Pres ident a m veto t he bills passed by
the Co ng ress. He / she e njoys two kin ds
ofvet os-Po cket ve to and Q ualifie d veto.
( i i) The Se nate co n firm s the highe r appoi n tments made a nd inte rnatio na l treatie s
conc luded by the Pres ide n t.
(i ii) Th e Co ngress determ ines th e organ isation
a nd appelJ atej uri sdictio n of th e j udi ciary.
( i v) The Pres id e nt a ppo ints t he judge s with
the co nse nt of the Se nate.
(v) The Supre me Co urt can declar e t he co ng ress io nal laws and Pres id e n tial orders
as ultra vims.

7. Supre macy of Const itutio n and Judici al
Revie w Th e Amer ica n Co nstitu ti on e mbodies th e prin ci pl e of 'hi c rarc hy of laws'. The
writte n Co nstitu t io n is rcga rd ed as the hi ghest
(supre m c or funda m e ntal ) law of th e land.
The statut es of th e Cong ress and sta te legis·
latu res mu st co nform to thi s sup re m e law. if
these stM utcs are aga inst t he provis io ns of
the Co nstitu tion , th ey ca n be declar ed by the
Supre me Co urt as ultra vires (l nd he nce, null
(l nd vo id. Th e Supre m e Co urt t hus acts CIS the
custod ia n of the Co nstitu tio n t h rough its power
of judicial rev iew.
8 . Bill of Rights The Amer ica n Co nst itution
is the first Co nst itu t ion in t he world to ca rry
the Bill of Rights. It gua ra n tees (I large numb e r
of ri ghts to th e peo pl e. It says t ha t 11 0 perso n
is to be depri ved o f life, libert y and prop·
erty wit hou t d ue proce ss of hlw. Th ese rig h ts
impos e restric tio ns on th e a uthori ty of the
Gover n m e nt. Th e Sup re m e Court acts as the
protec tor of these r ights throug h its power of

World Constitutions

judici al review. This Bill of Rights was added
to the origin al Con stituti on in ) 791 throu gh
th e first ten amend ments .
.

~.

9 . Bicam eralis m The Amer ican Feder al
Legisl ature ca ll ed the Con gress is bica me ral,
that is, it con sists of two House s, na mely the
Se nate and the House of Repre sentat ives. The
Senate is the uppe r House while the House of
Repre sentat i ves is the lower House. The Senate
consis ts of 100 m embers, two being elected
from each state to serve for a fixed six-ye ar
term. The House of Repre sentat ives co nsists
of 435 memb ers electe d from sin gle memb er
co nstitu e ncies to serve for a fixed two-y ear
term. Th e Senate is the more powerful chamb er
of the Congress. In fact, the Ame ri ca n Sen ate
is the most power ful seco nd chamb er (uppe r
House ) in the world.

~ AMERICAN PRESIDENT
Mode cfElec tion The Ameri can Co nstitu tion
provi des for an indire ct electi on of th e
Presid ent. However, the growth of politic al parties and politi cal conve ntio ns has conve rted it
into direct electio n.
Const ituti onally, the Presid ent is electe d
by a n electo ral college con st ituted for th e
purpo se. T he m embers of this college (ca ll ed
as Presid ential Electo rs) a re electe d direct ly
by the peopl e of all the states. T he numb er
of Presid enti al electo rs in each state is equal
to the numb e r of its memb ers in the Co ngress (both in the House of Repre sentat ives
a nd in the Senat e). It m ean s that the electoral coJl ege con sists of as many memb ers
as is the t\:>tal stre ngth of the two House s of
the Congr ess. Addit ionall y, three votes have
been given to the Distri ct of Colum bia, a federal enclav e and not a state. Thus, the tot.:·J.l
strength of the electo ral colleg e is 538 (435
is the streng th of the House of Repre sentatives, 100 is the stre n gth of the Senat e a nd
three me mbers of the Distri ct of Colum b ia).
A candi date in order to win the Presid ential
electi on needs 270 votes, that is, 269 (half of
the total votes of 538) plus on e.

a

~ 675

It must be stress ed here that the memb ers

of the electo ral colleg e a re not the memb ers
of the Congress. The coll ege is a specia l body
whi ch is forme d on ly for eJecti ng the President a nd it gets disso lved after this.
If no candid ate secure s the requis ite major ity, the House of Repre se nta tives elects the
Presid e nt from amon g the three ca ndida tes
securi ng the high est votes in the electo ral
college. The re have bee n three such occasi ons
( 1800, 1824 and 1876).
Q ualific ations , Term a nd Removal Accor ding
to th e Const itu tio n , a ca ndida te for the
pres ide n cy mu st have the follow ing three
qualif icatio ns:
( i) He/ sh e must be a natura l born citize n
of the USA. A n aturali sed citize n is not
el igibl e.
(ii) He / she must h ave attain ed the age of
thirty- five years.
(iii) He/ sh e must have been a reside nt of the
USA for fourte en years ( not n ecessa ril y
conse cuti ve).
T he Presid ent holds the office for a fixed
tenure of four years. He/ sh e is eli gibl e for reelectio n but onl y once. The 22 nd Amen dmen t
Act of 1951 has fixed the maxim um total tenn
for any Presid ent at ten years. In oth er words,
it bars a ny p e rso n from be ing electe d as
Presid ent more than t'vice. The Presid ential
term of four years begin s on 20th J a nu ary.
T he Presid ent may be rem oved from the
office before the expiry of his/ her norma l
tenure of four years throug h impea chme n t
for treaso n, briber y o r other high crime s a nd
misde mea nors. The House of Repre sentat ives
initiat es the impea chm e nt proce ed ings by a
maj ority vote. The case is then tried by the
Se nate. Durin g this tri a] period ) the Senat e
acts as a judici al tribun al a nd is presid ed
over by the chi ef justic e of the Supre me Court
(a nd not the vice-Preside nt). If the . Se nate
a lso passes the impea chm e nt resolu ti on by
a two-th i rds major ity, the Presid ent stands
impea ched . So far, no Amer ican Presid ent
h as eve r been remov ed by impea chm e nt.
Howeve r, there h ave been five impea chme nt

676

j! Indian Polity

attem pts - Andrew .10hnson (1868J, Richard
Nixon (1974 ), BilJ Cli nton (1998), Do nald
'fru mp (first tim e in 2019) and Donald Tru mp
(second tim e in 2021 ).
Powers and Functions The American presidency is one of the strongest de moc rati c offi ces
in the world. Lord Bryce regards it as 'the
greatest office in the world'. Mun ro observed,
"the Am e r ican Presid e nt exerci ses tll e largest a mount of authority ever wielded by any
ma n in a democra cy ~. Ogg rega rds him / her as
"th e greatest ruler of the world". H.arold Laski
remarked, "the Preside nt of the United States
is both more and less tha n a King , he/ she is
al so both more and less than a Prime Mi nister".
Th e Presid e nt derives hi s/ he r powers and
fun ct ion s from four source s: Con st itut io n,
statutes of Congress, judicial in te rp re ta t ion s
and politi ca l convention s. Th ese a re ment ion ed be low:
I. He / she has to enforce the Con stitution ,
fed e ral la ws a nd treaties, a nd judic ial
deci sion s throughout the cou n try.
2. He/ she is the supreme commander of th e
arm ed forces of th e US.
3 . He / she appoi n ts th e Sup reme Court
judges, amba ssadors, hea ds of exec uti ve
departments, diplom a ti c officia ls, co ns uls and other top officials.
4. He / she for mul ates fore ign poli cy and
conducts foreign a ffairs of the US.
5. He/ she can gram pardon a nd reprive for
offe nces aga inst federal laws (except in
ca ses of impeachment).
6. When a bi ll approved by both the Houses
of the Congress is sent to him / her for
his/ her asse nt, he/ she has three option s
befo re him / her:
(i) He/ she may give hi s/ her assent to
th e bill and the b ill then becomes
a n Act.
(ii) He/ she may reject the bill a nd return
it to the Congress with in te n days.
However, if tJle sa me bill is re-passed
by t he Con gress by a two-th irds
majority, then the bil l becomes a law
a nd the President has to sign it. Thi s
is knowl' as 'Qua lified Veto'.

(iii) He/ she may rescn'e the bi ll willl
h im. The n, the bilJ beco mes a law
after the expiry of tcn days without h is/ he r assent. However, if t he
Co ng ress ends the sess ion befo re
ten days, the n thc bill automa ti ca lly
dies. T hi s is known as 'Pocket Veto'.
7 . He/ she CilO send messages to the Congress
proposin g som e leg islat ive m ea su res;
eithe r ora ll y d e li vered to the Hou se or
se n t in t he form of a docu men t.
8. He / she can ca ll s pec ia l session s of the
Congress fo r con sid e rat ion of urge n t
matte rs.
9. He/ she prepares the national budget and
submit s it to the Con gress fo r a pproval.
10. He/ she is empowe red to make ml es a nd regulation s in the foml of execlI ti\'e o rders.
This is known as delegated legisla tion.
11. He/ she is e mpowe red to adjourn the
Con gress, wh e n there is a di sagree m e nt
betwee n two hou se s 011 th e d a te of
adjournment.

TBRITISH CONSTITUTION
The British Co nstitution is the Con stitution
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ire land. Great Britain con sists of
England, Wal es a nd Scotland. Engl a nd a nd
Wales were united in 1535 and Scotla nd joined
them to form the state of Grea t Brita in in 1707,
wh ile the Uni ted Ki ngdom of Great Britai n and
Northern Lreland was formed in] 92l.
Th e Briti sh co nsti tuti o na l system is t he oldest in t he wo rld and is a lso the o ldest democ ra tic syste m. In fact, the British Co nstitution
is t he 'mothe r of Constitutions'. The pri nciples
and in stitu tions o f represe n t..ltive Government
we re first developed in Britain.
The Briti s h Co nstitut io n is a bl e nd of
monarchy, ari stocracy a nd democracy. Th e
sa lient featu res of the British Con stitut io n are
expla in ed as follows:

J. Unwritten Constitution Unli ke the Amcrican Con stitution, the British Constitution is
unwritte n. In the UK, most of the principlcs
governing the distribution and exerc ise of th e

World Constitutions

governmental powers are not written. Only
a small portion of the British Constitution
is covered by written documents. The British
Constitution is an evolved Constitution, not an
enacted one. It is a product of history and a result
of evolution. It is a child of chance (accident)
as well as wisdom (design). It is not a static
Constitution but a remarkably dynamic one.
Hence, L.S. Amery in his book Thoughts on the
Constitution says that the British Constitution is
'a blend offormallaw, precedent and tradition'.
The various elements or sources of the
British Constitution are explained as follows:
(i) Conventions: Conventions co nsti·
tute a major element of the British
Constitution. These are the unwritten
prin ciples of political practices and
customary principles of constitutional
behaviour whi ch have developed in
the course of time. J.S. Mill described
them as the 'Unwritten maxims of the
Constitution'. However, unlike the laws,
they are not recognised and enforced by
judicial courts. But they playa very sig·
nificant role in the actual working of the
British political institutions. They are
generally observed as they are backed by
tradition and public opinion. The wellknown conventions in Britain are:
(a) The King or Queen should exercise
his/ her legal powers on the advise
of the Cabinet headed by the Prime
Minister.
(b) The King or Queen should appoint
the leader of the majority party
in the House of Commons as the
Prime Minister.
(c) The King or Queen should dissolve
the lower House of Parliament on
the advise of the Prime Minister.
(d) The King or Queen should give his/
her assent to all the Bills passed by
the Parliament.
(e) The Cabinet is collectively respon·
sible to the House of Commons.
(ii) Great Charters: These are also called
constitutional charters or constitutional landmarks. They are historical

~ 677

documents which define the powers of
the Crown and liberties of the citizens,
and so on. They have a significant bear·
ing on some of the basic aspects of the
British Constitution. The important
among such charters are the Magna Carta
(1215), the Petition of Rights (1628), the
Bill of Rights (1689), and others.
(iii) Statutes: These are the laws made
by the Bri~ish Parliament from time
to time. They define and regulate the
principles, structures and functions
of many British political institutions.
The important statutes in Britain
are the Habeas Corpus Act, 1679, the
Statute of Westminste r, 1931 , Ministers
of the Crown Act, 1937, the People's
Representation Act, ]948, and others.
(iv) Common Law: It isa body ofjudge-made
laws. It has defined some of the significant rules and principles pertaining to
the powers of the Government and its
relationship with the citizens. They are
accepted and enforced by judicial courts.
Dr. Ogg defines common law as 'the vast
body of legal precept and usage, which
through the centuries has acquired binding and almost immutable character'.
(v) Legal Commentaries: These are the
commentaries or text books written on
the constitutional law of the country by
the constitutional experts. They provide
insight into the working of the British
political institutions. They clarify the
meaning and fix the scope of certain
constitutional principles. Some of the
popular legal commentaries on the
British Constitution, are A.V. Dicey's 'Law
of the Constitution', Bagehot's 'English
Constitution', Blackstone's 'Commentaries
on the Laws of England', and others.
2. Flexible Constitution Unlike the American
Constitution, the British Constitution is flexible in nature. It requires no special procedure
for its amendment. It can be amended by the
Parliament in the same manner as the ordinary
laws are made. Thus, in Great Britain, there

678

,(I Indian Polity

exists no distinction between the con stitutional
Jaw and the ordinary law.
3. Un itary Constitution Grea t Briwin is a
unitary state. Hence, a ll the powers of th e
Governme n t 'He vested in a si ngle su preme
Cen tral Government. The loca l governme nts
are c reated o nl y for adm in istrat ive conveni ence and they work unde r t he complete
co ntrol of the Ce ntral Government located
at London. They derive their autho rity from
the Centra l Government wh ich ca n a lso a bolish them altogether at any time.
4 . Parl ia mentary Gove rnment T he British
Co nstitution provides for parliamentary form
of Govern ment in whi ch the executive hai ls
from the legislature and rema in s responsible
to it. The features of th e British Parliamentary
system of Government are as follows:
(i) The King or Queen is the 110mina l executive whil e t he Ca bi net is th e real execut ive. The King or Queen is head of the
Sta te wh il e the Prime Minister is head
of the Govern me nt.
Oi) The party whi ch secu res majority seats
in the House of Commo ns, forms th e
governme nt. The leader of that party is
appointed as t he Pr ime Minister by the
King/ Quee n .
(iii) The Ministers are indi viduall y as well as
co ll ectively responsible to the House of
Co mmons fo r the ir acts. They remain in
office so lo ng as they enjoy the majority
support in th e Hou se.
(iv) The Ki ng or Queen ca n di ssolve the
House of Commo ns on the advise of the
Prime Min ister.
(v) The Mini sters (members of the executive) are a lso the members of the British
Parliament. This avoids confl icts between
the executive and the legislatu re and facilitates better coo rdination between them.
5. Sovereignty of Parliament Sov~ reig n ty
means the supreme power within the State. That
supreme power in Great Britain lies with the
Parliament. Hence, soverei gnty of Parliament
(or suprema cy of Parliament) is a ca rdinal
princip le of the Bri tish constitutional law a nd

polit ica l syste m. This principle implies the
fo ll owing things:
(i) The British Parliament can make, amend,
substitute o r repeal any law. De Lo lm c
said, 'The Brit ish Parliame nt ca n do
everyth ing except make a woman a man
a nd a man a woman'.
(ii) T he Parliament ca n make co nstitutio na l
laws by the sa me procedurc as ordina ry
laws. In other words, there is no legal
distinction betwee n the const ituent
authority and the law-making authority
or the British Parliament.
(iii) The parliamentar y laws c ann ot be
declared inva lid by the judic iary as
being uncon st itutional. In other words,
t here is no system of j udicia l rev iew in
Great Britai n .
6. Rule of Law The doctrine of ru le of law
is one of the fundamenta l chara cte ristics of
lh e British constitutiona I systc m. It lays down
that the law is su preme and hence the Government must act according to law and with in the
limi ts of the law. A.V. Dicey in h is book The
Law of the Constitlltion (1885), has given the
fo ll owing t hree implications of the doctrine
of ru le of law:
(i) Absence of arbitrary power, tha t is no
man can be puni s hed except for a
brea c h of law.
(ii) Equal ity berore the law, that is, equ a l
subject ion of a ll citi zens ( rich or poor,
high o r low, offic ial or no n-officia l) to
the ordi nary law of the land administered by the ordinary law cou rts.
(iii) T he primacy of the rights of the indi vidual , that is t he Co nstitution is the resu lt
of th e rights of individual as defined and
e nforced by the courts of Jaw, rath er tha n
the Constitutio n being the source of the
individua l rights. The rights of the citizens of Grea t Britain flow from judicia l
decisions, n ot from the Constitutio n .
7. Constitutional Monarchy Great Britain is
a monarchical sta te. It is described as a limited
hered itary monarc hy. The hereditary monarch
( King or Queen) is the hea d of the state. The
Crown is th e visi ble symbol of the supreme

I

1

World Constitutions

executive power. However, the King or Queen
only reigns, but does not rule. These powers
are actually execised by the Cabinet headed by
the Prime Minister. The Cabinet is col1ectively
responsible to the Parliament for its actions
and ultimately to the electorate. Hence, what
Great Britain has is a 'constitutional monarchy'.
The distinction between the Crown and the
King is the distinction between the monarchy
as an institution and the monarch asa person.
In other words, the King is a person whereas
the Crown is an institution (Le. the institution
of kingship). The King is mortal whereas the
Crown is immortal. This is clearly expressed
by the popular statement in Great Britain that
'the King is dead; long live the King'. It means
that tbe person who occupied the throne is
dead but the institution of kingship survives.
8. Bicameralism The British Parliament is
bicameral, that is, it consists of two houses, namely
the House of wrds and the House of Commons.
The House of Lords is the upper House. It
is the oldest second chamber in the world. It
consist of lords, peers and nobles and hence,
represent the aristocratic element of the British
political system. At present it has 677 appointed
members who fall into four distinct groups. It
is mostly a hereditary body.
The House of Commons is the lower House
but more important and powerful than the
House of Lords. It is the oldest popular legislative body in the world. It consists of the
representatives elected by the people on the
basis of universal adult franchise. There are at
present 659 seats in the House of Commons and
these are distributed among England, Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland.

t BRITISH CABINET
Composition As the British Constitution provides for parliamentary system of government,
the Cabinet acts as the real executive authority.
It consists of the Prime Minister as its head
and twenty or so of his/her most senior minIt includes the , following:
isterial colleagues.
".
,
"..,."
, ,
.
1. Prime Minister and First Lord of the
1teasury and Minister for the Civil Service

.

'!1 679

2 . Chancellor of the Exchequer
3. Lord Privy Seal
4. Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster
5. Lord President of the Council
6. President of the Board of Trade
7. Lord Chancellor
8. First Lord of Admiralty
9. Post Master General
10. Secretaries of State for Home, Foreign,
Defence, Social Services, Environment
and Education and Science
11 . Ministers of Agriculture and Fisheries,
Health, Pension, Transport and Labour
12 . Secretary of State of Scotland
13. Secretary of State for Wales
It must be mentioned here that the Attorney·
General, Solicitor-General, Lord Advocate and
Paymaster·General are not members of the
British Cabinet.
Privy Council There is a close relationship
between the Cabinet and the Privy Council.
This council, in its present form, came into
existence in the fifteenth century as an
advisory body to the British monarch. In
the course of time, most of its powers were
transferred to the cabinet as its inner committee. Presently, it consists of 330 members
and includes, inter alia, all cabinet ministers
(past and present). It is presided over by the
Lord President of the Council.
Prime Ministerial Government In the past, the
British Constitutional and political experts had
described the relationship between the Prime
Minister and the Cabinet as 'Primus inter pares'
(first among equals). In the recent period, the
Prime Minister's power, influence and posi·
tion have increased significantly vis·a·vis the
cabinet. He/she has come to playa 'dominant'
'r ole in the British Politico-administrative
system. Hence, the later political analysts,
like Crossman, Mackintosh and others have
described the British Cabinet Government as
'Prime Ministerial Government'.
Shadow Cabinet It is a unique institution
of
the British Cabinet system. It is formed by
."', ,\, . ' , ..)" ,i"") .' ...... ".~" ... , •. 1. "
the opposition party
to ,balance
the
ruling
•
1
1.
cabinet and to prepare its members for future

680

indian Polity

m in isteria l office. In Brita in , the o pposit io n
enjoys a n offici al recog n it io n a nd is as we ll
organ ised as the govern men t. It runs a 'Parallel'
governm e n t with its shadow ca bi net. In thi s
shadow cabi n et, a lmost every m ember in the
ruling ca bi net is 'shadowed' by a correspond ing
mem ber in the op posi tion ca binet. The members of the shadow cab inet watch crit ic.1 11 y the
wo rki ng of th e departm ents ass ig ned to the m.
T hey m atch the c.1binet m in isters in the pa rlia m e n tary deba tes. The shadow ca bi net se rves
as the 'al te rnative cab in et' if th ere is change
of gove rnm e nt . T hat is why Ivo r J e nn in gs
descri bed the lea de r o f o pposit io n as t he 'a lter native' Prime Min ister. He/ she e njoys the status
of a Mi n ister and is pa id by th e gove rnm e nt.

t FRENCH CONSTITUTION
The Frenc h Revoluti o n ( 1789-1799) had a significa n t im pact o n the growt h of t he Fre n ch
co nst it ut io n a l syste m . Since t he revolution,

Fra nce has c ha n ged its Co nst ituti o n o n an
ave ra ge after eve ry 12 years. It ado pted th rec
mo na rc h ic, two d ictato ri al, t h ree im pe r ial
a nd fo u r repu blica n Co nst itu t io n s. The prese n t Fre n ch Co n stitut io n , wh ich establi shed
the Fifth Repub lic, ca m e into force in 1958.
I t was prepa red under t he ins truct io ns o f
Gene ral de Gau ll e. It was des ig ned [Q give
Fran ce a strong an d stab le Gove rnm e nt.
T he sa li en t feat ures of th e Co n sti tution of
the Fifth French Repu bli c a re as fo ll ows:
I. Written Const itution Li ke th e Am erica n
Co n st itu t ion , th e Fre n ch Con st ituti on is a
'Hitten ConstitUli o n . Orig ina ll y, it conta in ed
a P rea mbl e a nd 92 Art ic les d iv id ed i n to
15 ch a p te rs. Il d eclares 'L iberty, Equ a li ty
a n d Frate rn ity' as t he m otto of t he Fifth
Rep ub lic. It states, "Fran ce is an indi vis ibl e,
secu l<l r, de m oc rat ic a n d soc ia l re p ublic". T h e
chap ters of th e Co n sti t ut ion a re m e n t io n ed
in Thble 92. 1.

Table 92.1 French Constitution at a Glance (As Amended till now)
Chapter Number

Chapter Headmg

Articles Covered

Preamble
Sovereignty

2104

II

The President of the Republic

5 to 19

III

The Government

20 to 23

IV

Parliament

24 to 33

V

Relations between Parliament and Government

34 to 51·2

VI

Treaties and International Agreements

52 to 55

VII

The Constitutional Council

56 to 63

VIII

The Judicial Authority

64 to 66-1

IX

The High Court

67 to 68

X

The Criminal liability of the Government

68-1 to 68-3

XI

The Economic, Social and Environmental Council

69 to 71

The Defender of Rights

71·'

XI-A
XII

Territorial Communities

72 to 75-1

XIII

Transitional Provisions Pertaining to New Caledonia

761077

XIV

On the French-Speaking World and Association Agreements

8710 88'

XV

On the European Union

88-1 to 88-7

XVI

On Amendments to the Constitution

89

XVII

(Repealed)

'Articles 78 to 86 were repealed.

,
World Constitutions

2. Rigi d Co nstitution Unlike the British
Constitution, the French Constitution is rigid
in nature. It contains a special procedure for
its amendment. It can be amended by the
Parliament by 60 per ce nt majority vote in
both the houses. Alternatively, the President
ca n call a national referendum on con stitutional a mendment. Howeve r, the republica n
form of government in France is not subject
to a mendm e nt. Thus, there is no place for
monarch y in Fran ce.
3. Un itary C onstitution France is a unitary state. There is no division of powers
between the central and local governments.
All powers are vested in the single supreme
Central Governm ent located in Paris. The
local governm ents are created a nd abolished
by the Ce ntral Governm ent for administrative
co n venien ce. In fact, France is more unitary
than Britain.
4 . Qu asi -P resi den ti al a nd Qu as iParliament ary The French Constitution provides n eith er Presidential nor p arliamentary
government. Rather, it combin es the elemen ts
of both. On one hand, it provides for a powerful President who is directly elected by the
people for a five-year term, on the other, there
is a nominated council of ministers h eaded
by the Pri me Minister which is responsible to
the Parliament. However, the ministers shall
not be th e members of the Parliament.
Over a p eriod of time, the provisio n s
of the Co nst ituti o n relating to the mode
of election, tenure of office and number of
term s of the President of France have been
amended. These are m entioned in Thbl e 92.2.

S. Bicame ralis m Th e French Parliament
comprises the National Assembly (the lower

Table 92.2
51 N o

r

1.

2.
3.

~, 681

house) and the Sen ate (upper house). The
Nation al Assembly has 577 m embers who
are directly elected for a five-year term. The
Senate has 348 members who are indirectly
elected for a six-year term. The Nationa l
Assembly is more dominant and powerful
than the Senate.
6 . Rationali sed Par lia ment The Co nstitution of France established a rationalised
Pa rli ame nt, that is, a Parliament with
restricted a n d limited powers. The powers of the French Parliament are restricted
vis-a-vis the political executive. It ca n m ake
laws only on those items which are defined
in the Con st itution . On all other matters,
the government is empowered to legislate by
executive decree. The Parliament can also
delega te law-making power to the executive
branch. These limitations on parliamentary
authority were imposed to provide for a
stro ng executive.
7. Consti t utional Council France has a
Constitution al Council. It con sists of nine
m embers who are appointed for a term of
nine yea rs. It functions as a judicial watchdog
a nd ensures that the executive decrees and
parliamentary laws conform to the provisions
of the Con st itution . However, it is only an
advisory body and its opinion is not b inding.
8 . Re cognit ion of Polit ica l Part ies Th e
Co n stitution of Fran ce gives re cogn ition
to politica l parties an d their rol e. It is for
the first tim e in France that a Republica n
Constitution not only mention p arties but
also acknowledges them as a normal p art
of political life. The Co nstitution states th at
the ~ part ie s must respect the princi ples of
national sovereignty and d e mo c ra cy~.

Amended Provisions of the Constitution Relating to the French President

Elemenls

. Mode of election - _..
~.-

O n gma l ProvIsions

Indirect election
.."..,.,...,.

Amended PrOVISIons (year)

--- ..... -..

Tenure of office

Seven years

Number of terms allowed

No lim it on the number of terms

Direct election (1962)

Five years (2000)

. -

~

Not more than two consecutive terms (2008)

J

682 ,~ Indian Polity

t FRENCH PRESIDENT
Mode of Election Or igin a ll y, th e Co n st ituti on p rov ided for a n ind irect e lectio n of
t he Pres iden t. I-Ie/sh e was to be elected by
a n electo ra l coll ege co ns isting of th ree t ypes
of members - (i) nat io na l represe ntati ves
( m em be rs of two Ho uses o f Pa rl ia m ent) ;
(ii ) rep resentat ives of the loca l a uthorit ies
and ( ii i) representatives of th e ove rsea s terri tori es. Howeve r, in 1962, th e Co nstitutio n
was ame nded thro ugh a refe re nd um .
Th e Pres ide nt is now directl y e lected by
un ive rsa l su ffra ge. In ord er to win t he election , a cand id ate has to obta in a n absol ute
majority of the votes cast. In ca se no ca ndi da te obta in s the requ is ite majority in the first
ba ll ot, th en a second ba ll ot is held. Only th e
two cand idates who have rece ived the high est
n umbe r of votes in the first ballot may sta nd
in t he second ba ll ot.
Ten ure and Removal T h e Pres id e nt is
e lec ted for a te rm of fi ve yea rs. He/ she is eligible for re-election; but for a n oth e r con secutive te r m onl y. Mo reover, t he Co n stitution
ha s n ot presc r ib e d an y qu a li fi c at io n s
( in clud in g the m inimum a ge li mit) fo r the
Pres id en tia l offi ce.
If th e presiden cy fa ll s vacant, th e functio ns
of the Pres ident (except subm itt i ng a bill to
a refere ndum a nd d issolut io n of th e Na tio nal
Assemb ly) are performe d te mporari ly by t he
Preside nt of th e Senate and if h e / she is a lso
not in a position, the functions a re pe rfonn ed
by th e gove rn me n t.
T he Pres ident can be rem oved from the
office before the exp iry of hi s/ h e r normal
te n ure of fi ve years through an impeachme nt
fo r hi gh t reason. Th e impeachm ent reso lution sho uld be passed by both the Houses of
Pa rHam ent by an absolute majority. After thi s
ind ictm ent by th e Par1ia ment, th e Pres ident
is t ried by t he High Court of J ustice.
Powers and Functions Th e Pres ident is the
pivot of the Con sti tution a nd occupies a do mina nt positi on in the syste m of governm e nt.
He/ she is the rea l h ead of the sta te, th e leader

of tlle nation an d the sym bol of nationa l un ity.
Hi s/ he r powe rs and functio ns a re as fo ll ows:
1. He/ she appo ints th e Pri me Min ister a nd
a ccepts hi s/ he r res ignat ion.
2. He/ she appo in ts and dismi sses the other
me mbers of th e govern me n t (Cou nci l of
Mi ni sters) on the advice of the Pr ime
Min ister.
3. He / she pres ides ove r th e meet i ngs of
Council of Ministers. Th is provides h im/
he r a direct o pportu nity to infl ue nce,
guide, direct a nd control the policies of
th e govern me nt.
4 . i-Ie/ she makes appoi nt me nts to civil and
m ili ta ry posts of th e state.
5. He/ she is th e comm ander-i n-chi ef of the
a r med forces o f [he country.
6. He / sh e negot iates a nd ra tifies treati es
and se nds a nd recei ves d iplomats.
7. He/ she is kept in form ed of a ll the negotia tio n s lead ing to the co nclu sio n of a n
intern a tio na l a greem e nt not subject to
rat ifi cation .
8. He/ she pres ides ove r the h ighe r counc ils
and comm ittees of natio na l defe nce.
9 . He / she presides Q\'e r a nd represe n ts th e
fre nch comm uni ty.
]0. He/ she appo ints the Preside nt a nd t hree
m e mbers of th e Con stitu tiona l Cou nc il.
n . He/ she pro mul gates the laws with in fiftcen days fol1 owin g th e ir fi nal adoption
by the Parliament and tra nsm ission to the
governm ent. Howeve r, before th e e nd of
this period, he/ she ca n a sk the Parliament
to reconsider a law. Th is reconside rat ion
ca nnot be re fu sed by the Pa rliamen t.
12. He/ she ca n send messages to the Parlia ment
and sum mon its specia l sessions.
13 . He/ she ca n subm it to a referendu m any
govern ment b ill on the p roposa l of the
govern me n t d uring the parli a me nta ry
sessions or on the joint proposa l of th e
n \lO I-Jouses of the Pa rl iam ent. Lfthe biJl is
approved in the referendum , the President
should promul gate it within fifteen days.
14. He/ she signs th e ord inan ces and decrees
tha t have been con sidered by the Council
of Min isters.

J

World Constitutions

15 . He/ she has the right to pardon.
16. He/ she presides over the Higher Council
of the judiciary. He/she also appoints
nine m embers to it.
17. He/ she is the protector of the independence of the judicial authority.
18. He / she is vested with specia l powers
to deal with emergencies. During this
period, he/she can take the required
m easures after consulting the Prime
Mi ni ster, the Presidents of the two
Assembli es (Houses) of the Parliament
and the Constitutio nal Council.
19. He / she can dissolve the Nationa l
Assembly, after con sul ting the Prime
Minister and the Presidents of the two
Assemblies (Houses of the Parliament).
The Constitution, however, imposes two
limitations: (i) He/ sh e cannot dissolve
the National Assembly more than once
;i n twelve months and (ii) the National
Assembly cannot be dissolved during
an e m erge n cy. Notably, the President is
not required to follow the advice of the
prime minister and the Presidents of the
two Assemblies. Further, the President
ca n refuse dissolution when asked by
the prime minister.

t JAPANESE CONSTITUTION
The modern state of Japan came into existen ce with the Meiji Restoration in 1868.
The Meiji Co n stituti on remained in force for
58 years (from 1889 to 1947). This Co n stitution was based on the ideals of autocracy,
a uthoritarianism and monarchy.
After the Second World War (1939-1945),
Japan was placed unde r Allied Occupation
from 1945 to 1952. The U.S. General Douglas
MacArthur was the Supreme Commander of the
Allied Powers in Japan. Under his direction,
Japan adopted a n ew democratic Constitution
in 1946. This Constitution is based on the ideals of democracy and peace, as con ceived by
the Occupation Authorities.
The n ew and the present Constitution of
Japan became operative in 1947. It came to
be known both as the MacArthur Constitution

~ 683

as weB as the Showa Con stitution . $h owa is
the title of the reign of Em peror Hirohito and
means 'Radiant Peace'. At the time of adoption of the new Constitution, Hirohito was
the Emperor an d Shideh ara was the Prime
Minister of Japan.
The salient features of the present Constitution of Japan are as fo llows:

I. Written Constitution Like the Am erica n
Constitution, the Japanese Constitution is a
written Constitution. It contains a Preamble
a nd 103 Articles divided into II chapters. It is
a unique blend of the American and the British
system. The Preamble emphasises the principle
of the sovereignty of the people. The chapters of
the Constitution are mentioned in Thble 92.3.
2. Ria:id Constitution Like the American
Constitution, the Japanese Constitution is a
rigid one. It cannot be amended by the Diet
(Japanese Parliament) in th e same manner as
the ordin ary laws are made. It can be amended
only by means of a special process provided
by the Constitution for that purpose. Hen ce,
in Japan, there exists a distinction between a
constitutional law and an ordi nary law.
The Japanese Constitution lays down the
following procedure for its amendment:
(i) 'The amendment shall be initiated by the
Diet. Such a proposal must be passed by a
majority of two-thirds of its membership.
(ii) After that, it is submitted to the people
for ratification at a special referendum or a specific election. It must be
approved by the majority ofthe people.
(iii) Amendme nt when so ratified sh a ll
immediately be promulgated by the
Emperor in the name of the people, as
a n integral part of the Constitution.
It must be mentioned h ere that the Japanese
Constitution has not so far been amended even
once. Thus, the Con stitution reads today as it
did in 1947.
3. Unitary Constitution Like the British
Constitution, the Japanese con stitution provides for a unitary state. There is no division
of powers between the Ce ntral and provincial

(! Indian Polity

684

Table 92.3

Japanese Constitution at a Glance

Chapter Number

Chapter Heading

ArtIcles Covered

The Emperor

1 to 8

II

Renunciation of War

9

III

Rights and Duties of the People

10 to 40

IV

The Diet

41 to 64

V

The Cabinet

65 to 75

VI

Judiciary

76 to 82

VII

Finance

83 10 91

VIII

local Self-government

92 to 95

IX

Amendments

96

X

Supreme Law

97 to 99

XI

Supplementary Provisions

100 to 103

Governm e nts. All powers are vested in the
single supreme Ce ntral Governm e nt located
at Tokyo. The provin ces deri ve thei r a uth ority
fro m the Centra l Government. The Dim can
expand or dimini sh the authority a nd jurisdicti o n of the provinces. Th us, the provinces a re
subo rdina te units o f Government and enjoy
oilly those powers wh ich are delegated to them
by the sup re me Ce ntral Government.
4. Parliamentary Government Japan has
shown a prefere nce for the British Parliame ntary System rather than the American
Presidentia l Syste m of Gove rn me nt. The fea*
tures of the Japanese Pa rliam e nta ry syste m
of Governm ent are as follows:
(i) The Em pe ror is the no m inal executive whi le th e Ca bin et is the real
executive. Th e Cabin et con sists of the
Prim e Min ister as its head and twen ty
Ministers o f State. The Em peror is
the head of the State whil e the Prim e
Minister is head of th e Govern ment .
(ii) The party wh ich secures majority sea ts
in the House of Represe n tatives form s
the Gove rnm e nt. The lea der of th e
majority party or majority coa li tion
in va ri ably becomes the Prim e Minister.

(iii) Th e Prim e Minister is designated fro m
among the members of the Diet by a
resolu tio n of the Di et. 'fhe Emperor
appoints the Prime Mi ni ster as designated by the Diet.
(iv) The Pr im e Mini ster appoints the
Min iste rs of State. But, a ll1<1j or ity of
them should be chosen fro m a lUo ng the
members of t he Di et.
( v) The Prime Minister can remove the
Ministers of State as he/ she chooses.
(vi) The Cabinet, in the e.'{ercise ofthe e.'{ecutive power, is collective ly respon sibl e
to the Di et. It mu st res ign when the
Ho use of Representat ives pa sses a nocon fi dence resolutio n .
(vii) The Emperor can dissolve the House
of Representatives o n the advice of the
Prime Ministe r.
An analysis of the above poin ts makes it
clear tha t J apa n (t hough adopted the British
Parliamentary pattern) differed from Britain
in the followi ng four respects:
1. ]n Britain, the Prime Minister is chosen
as well as appo inted by the King/ Queen,
while in Japan, the Prime lVlinister is
chose n by the Diet but a ppointed by the
Em pero r.

World Constitutions

2. In Britain, the Ministers are appointed
by the King/Queen, while in Japan, the
Ministers are appointed by the Prime
Minister.
3. In Britain, the Prime Minister cannot
remove the Ministers, while in Japan,
the Prime Minister can remove the
Ministers at his/her will.
4. In Britain, all the Ministers must be members of the Parliament, while in Japan,
only a majority of the Ministers must
be members of the Diet.
5. Constitutional Monarchy Japan is a monarchical state. It is described as a limited
hereditary monarchy. The Constitution, though
it preserves the institution of the Emperor, it
deprives him/her of all powers, privileges and
prerogatives he/she formerly exercised and
enjoyed. It makes the following provisions
with regard to the institution of the Emperor:
(i) The Emperor is the symbol of the state
and of the unity of the people. He/she
derives his/her position from the will
of the people with whom resides sovereign power. Thus, the sovereignity of the
Emperor is absolished.
(ii) The Imperial Throne is dynastic and succeeded to in accordance with the law
passed by the Diet.
(iii) The advice and approval of the Cabinet
is required for all acts of the Emperor.
(iv) The Emperor performs only those
acts which are enumerated in the
Constitution and he/she has no powers
related to Government.
(v) The Emperor can neither give nor receive
imperial property without the authorisation of the Diet.
Thus, the Constitution has made the Emperor merely a constitutional head. His/her
authority is strictly limited to ceremonial
functions of a constitutional monarch. Like
his/her British counterpart, he/she only reigns
and does not rule.
6. Supremacy of Constitution and Judicial
Review The Japanese Constitution establishes
the principle of supremacy of Constitution.
The Constitution is regarded as the supreme

'tt 685

(highest or fundamental) law of the land. The
laws, ordinances, imperial rescript and official
acts must conform to this supreme law. If these
are against the provisions of the Constitution,
they can be declared by the Supreme Court as
ultra-vires and hence, null and void.
Thus, the American principle of judiCial
review is adopted in Japan. But there is a difference. The American Supreme Court does
not derive its power of judicial review from the
Constitution, whereas the Japanese Supreme
Court derives its power ofjudicial review directly
from the Constitution. The Japanese Constitution
specifically says that the Supreme Court is the
court of last resort with power to determine the
constitutionality of any law, order, regulation,
or official Act.
7. Fundamental Rights The Japanese Constitution provides for rights on the model of the
Bill of Rights in the USA. It guarantees a large
number of civil, political and economic rights
to the people of Japan and declares them as
'eternal and inviolate'. The judiciary headed
by the Supreme Court acts as the protector of
these rights through its power of judicial review.
The rights provided by the Japanese Constitution are more elaborate and definite
than the American Bill of Rights. Out of
a total of 103 Articles in the Constitution,
31 Articles (10 to 40) are devoted to the rights
and duties of the people. The rights provided
for in the Constitution are:
(i) Right to equality
(ii) Right to freedom
(iii) Right to freedom of religion
(iv) Right to private property
(v) Economic rights
(vi) Right to education
(vii) Cultural rights
(viii) Right to constitutional remedies
8. Renunciation of War The Japanese Constitution renounces war as a sovereign right
of the nation and the threat or use of force as
means of settling international disputes. It
prohibits Japan from maintaining land, sea,
and air forces, as well as other war potential. It
also does not recognise the right of belligerency
of the sta teo

686

ff

Indian Polity

Japan is th e onl y modern stale whi ch
has constitu ti o nally re noun ced war fo reve r.
It is the most peculi a r a s we ll as the most
controvers ial feature of the Japa n ese Con stitution . Thi s prov ision was got in serted into
th e Co n stituti o n by Ge n e ral MacArthur to
see t hat Japan would neve r aga in be all owe d
to ac t a s a military nation a s it did during
th e pe riod of 193] to 1945 a nd to abo li sh
foreve r t he powe r of Japa n as a rival to t he
us in the far ea st.l-loweve r, it does not mean
that Japan cann ot use arms and other forces
for its security a nd de fe nce. Like a ny ot her
mod e rn sta te, Japan ha s its de fe nce capabilities but t he term used is 'sel f-de fe nce forces'
to loo k con stitution a ll y cor rect. They are
justified on th e ground t ha t eve ry sta te ha s
an inh e rent right to de fend itse lf again st
fore ig n aggress ion .
9. Bicameralism The J a panese Di e t is bi cameral, that is, it co ns ists of two houses, nam e ly
the House of Councillors (upper House) and the
House of Represe nta tives ( lowe r I-louse). Th e
Hou se of Coun c illors con sists of 252 members
elected for a te rm of six years. Out of the total
252 me mbers, ] 52 are elected on a geographi ca l
basis (local con stituen cies) and the re mainin g
100 are e lected by the nation at large ( natio nal
constitu e ncy). The House of Representatives
co nsists of 512 me mbers e lected fo r a te rm of
fou r yea rs. Th e House of Re prese ntatives has
more powers than the I-louse of Co uncillors,
especia ll y in fin a ncial ma tte rs.
Co nstituti onall y, the Di et is th e hi ghest o rga n of sta te powe r and is th e sol e la w-making
orga n of the state.

t SOVIET CONSTITUTION
Th e state of th e USS R, a lso ca ll ed as the
Sovi et Union , was foml ed in 1917 followin g
t he Ru ss ian Revolution ( Bo lshevik Revo hltion ) led by th e charismatic V.1. Le nin. After
bein g a Supe r Power fo r mo re t han 70 years,
the USSR finall y colla psed a nd di Sintegrated
in 1989- 1991 mainly du e to economi c cri sis.
Th e Russi a n Revoluti o n of Octob er 1917
creat ed, fo r th e fi rst time eve r a socia list st:.:lte

whose goal wa s Communism. Hence, the Soviet
Con stitution wa s th e first soc ialist Constitutio n of the world_Sin ce its formation in 1917,
th e USS R a dopted four Con stitutions, tha t is,
in 1918, 1924, 1936 (Sta lin Co nstitution) and
1977 ( Brezhn ev Con stitu tion).
The constitu tiona l system of the USSR was
based on the prin c iples and ide ologi es of
Ma rxism- Lenini sm . Thus, th e Communist
Party dominated the e ntire political and administra tive system of the USSR. It wa s in this
respect that the politi co-a dministrative system
of the USS R was differe nt from tha t of the UK,
USA a nd Fra nce.
Th e sal ient features of the Soviet Con stitutio n or 1977 are exp lain ed as follows:
I. Written Constitution Like Americ.l n and
French Constitutions, the Soviet Constitution was
al so a writte n one. It was drafted by a committee
headed by Mr. Brezhnev. It had 20 Chapters a nd
174 Articles divided into 9 parts.

2. Ri&id Constitution Th e Sov iet Con stitution was ri gid in na ture. It prov ided for a
sp ec ial procedure for its am e ndm e nt. It could
be a me nded by th e leg islature of th e USS R
(Supre me Sov ie t) by a two-third majority in
each House.
3. Socialist Constitution The Co nstitution was
soc ia listic in na ture a nd la id down the founda tion ofa soc ia list state. It sta ted tha t 'the Uni on
of Soviet Soc iali st Republics is a socialist sta te
o f t he whole people, expressin g th e will and
inte rests of the workers, peas.l nts and intellige ntsia , the wo rking peopl e of HII t he natio ns
a nd na tiona lities of the coun try'. It also stated
that 'the foundation of the econ om ic system of
the USS R is soc ia list ownersh ip of the mea ns
of production in th e form of state prope rty
(be lo nging to all th e people) a nd collective
farm a nd coope ra tive pro perty'.
4 . Federal Constitution The Consti t ution
pro vid ed for a fede r,a l stat e c onSisting of
15 uni ts call ed Union Republi cs. Th ese units
of th e Soviet Federatio n were Ru ssia, Ukraine,
Bye lorussia, Uzbekistan, Kazakh sL.ln , Georgia,
A. ze rbaijan , Lithu a nia , Moldav ia , Latvi a,

World Constitutions

Kyrgyzstan, Thjikistan, Armenia, Thrkm enistan
and Estonia. The powers were divided between
the Centre and the units. The powers of the
Centre were enumerated while the residuary
powers were given to the units as in the case of
th e USA. These 15 Union Republics had th eir
own separate Constitutions conforming to the
Constitution of the USSR and enjoyed the right
to secede from the USSR.
Within several Union Republics ex isted
autonomous republics (2 0), autonomous
region s (8) and autonomous areas (to).
They were vested with a cer ta in amount
of autonomy. Hen ce, the Union Re publics
were Ca lled sub-federations within the Soviet
Federation and the USSR was called a 'Federation of Federations'.
5. Parliamentary Government The Con st itution provided for a parliamentary form
of Government in the USSR. The Council of
Ministers was elected by the Suprem e Soviet
(1egislature of the USSR) and remained responsible to it for its policies and acts. The Supreme
Soviet could also remove the Ministers from
their offices. The Con stitution stated that 'the
Council of Ministers headed by the Premier
is the highest executive and administrative
authority of the USSR'.
6. Bicameralism The Con stitution provided
for a bicameral legislature for the USSR. Thus,
the Supreme Soviet con sisted of the Soviet
of the Union (lower House) and the Soviet
of the Nationalities (upper House). Both the
houses had eq ual number of members (i.e.
750 in each) elected directly ever y five years.
The lower House represen ted the nation as
a whole while the upper House represented
the units of the Soviet Federation. The two
Houses had equal and coo rdinated powers in
al1 policy matters.
7. Presidium The Supreme Soviet, constitutional1y the highest body of sta te authority
of the USSR, elected a governing body known
as the Presidium. The Constitution termed it
as the Standing Committee of the Su preme
Soviet. It was a 39-member body co nsi sting

~ 687

of a Chairman, First Vice-Chairman, 15 Vice
Cha irmen ( Le. ~he h eads of th e 15 Union
Republics), a Secretary and 21 members. The
Chairman (President) of the Presidium was
the formal head of the State of th e USSR. It
fun ctioned as a collective presi den cy of the
USSR. Hence it was called the 'Collegial Executive' or the 'Plural Executive' or the 'Coll egia te
President' of the USSR. It combined executive,
legislative, diplomatic, military and judicial
functions. Because of its multifarious functions and the plural character, the Presi dium
of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR has been
described as the '20th Century Innovation.'
This type of institution was not provided by
any other Co nstitution of the world.
8. One-Party Dictatorship The most important feature of the con stitutional system of the
USSR was th e monopol y of th e political power
enjoyed by the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union (CPSU). The Soviet Constitution stated,
'the leading and guiding force of Soviet Society
and the nucleus of its political system, of all
state organisations and public organisations
is the Communi st Party of the Soviet Union.
The CPSU exists for the peopl e and selVes the
people. The Communist Party, armed with
Marxism-Leninism, determines the general
persp ectives of the development of society
and the course of hom e and foreign poli cy of
the USSR, directs the great constructive work
of the Soviet people and imparts a planned,
systemati c and theoretically substa ntiated
character to their struggle for the victory of
communism'.
9. Democratic Centralism The Co nstitution
stated that 'the Soviet sta te is organised and
functions on the prinCiple of de mo cratic
centralism, namely the electiveness of a11
bodi es of state authority from the lowest to
the highest, their accountability to th e peopl e
and the obligation of lower bodies to observe
the decisions of higher ones. Democrati c
centrali sm combines central leadership with
local initiative and creative activity and with
the responsibility of each state body and
officia l for the work entrusted to them'.

688

,('I Indian Polity

This princi p le Wcl S applicab le to gove rnm enta l
o rga ni sat io n; hi erarchy of the Sovie ts a n d the
Comm un is t Pa rty organ isat ion.
10. Fundamen t al Rights The Co nst itu t ion
also prov ided fo r a large numbe r of econ omic,
socia l, perso nal, culluml a nd political righ ts
to th e cit izens of the USS R. These rights we re
guaran teed to ,:1 11 the c iti ze ns of the country
equa ll y irres pective of na ti o na li ty, race, sex,
and so 0 11 . T he for m of th e ri ghts granted to
th e citi ze ns was socia li st, not personal , tha t
is th ey were mean t for the esta blish men t ofa
soc ia li st syste m in th e USS R. Thus, the enj oyment of these rights by the citi ze n s was not
to detr ime n t the interests of soc iety o r state
o r the r ights of other citi ze ns.
The list of fu nda me nta l rights prov ided by
th e Soviet Co nstitut io n are:
( i) Righ t to work
(ii) Rig ht to rest a nd leisure
(i ii) Right to healt h protectio n
( iv) Ri ght to ma intena nce in old age, sickness a nd d isa b ility
(v) Right to housi ng
(v i) Ri ght to educa tio n
(v ii ) Ri ght to enjoy cultu ra l be nefi ts
(v ii i) Freedom o f sc ien tific, tec hn ical a nd
a rt ist ic wo rk
( ix) Right to wke part in the ma nagement
a nd admin istrat ion of State a nd p ubli c affai rs
(x) Righ t to su b mi t p ro posa ls to the
State bod ies an d publi c and soc ia l
orga n isat io ns
(x i) Freedo m of speech , press, asse mb ly,
m eeti n gs, st reet process io n s and
de mo nstratio ns
( xii) Right to associate in publ ic and social
orga ni sa tio ns
(x iii ) Freedo m of co nscien ce
(x iv) Righ t to see k fa mi ly protect io n
(xv) Right to in vio la bility of person a nd
house
(xv i) Righ t of pr ivacy of cit ize n s
(xv ii ) Righ t to protectio n by th e co urt
(xv iii ) Right to appeal aga inst th e ac tio ns of
the offi cia ls, state bod ies and pub lic
bodi es

II . Funda menta l Duties Apart fro m the fun·
da menta l ri ghts, the Constitu ti on also prov ided
fo r fun dame n ta l d u t ies. The Co n stitu t ion
stated that the exerc ise of these righ ts and freedoms by the cit ize ns was insepara ble fro m the
pe rfo rm a nce of these du ties a nd obligatio ns.
Th e fo ll ow in g is the list of the fun dam e.n tal
du ties co ntai n ed in th e Co nst itut ion:
(i) 1b obse rve th e Constitution of the USS R
a nd Soviet laws
(i i) To observe la bour d isc ipli ne
( iii) 1b prese rve a nd protect the socia lis t
pro perty
( iv) 1b silfeg uard the interests ohhe Soviet
sta te
(v) 1b defend the socia li st moth erla nd
(v i) To re nder mili ta ry se rvice
(v ii ) To respect the nationa l dignity of mh er
cit ize ns
(vii i) To respect the r ights and lawful in terests of other pe rso ns
( ix) To protect nature a nd conse rve its
ri chn ess
(x) To preserve hi storica l mo num ents and
ot he r cultura l va lu es
(x i) 1b pro mote a nd strengthen world p eace

t RUSSIAN CONSTITUTION
Ru ss ia was th e la rges t co n s t itu e nt uni t
of the fo rm e r USS R. It was 75 per ce nt of
the to ta l a rea o f the form er USS R a nd had
SO pe r ce nt o f its tota l popul a tion. It also
con tri b uted abou t 70 pe r cent to th e tota l
ag ri cul tu ral a nd indu st ri al output of th e
fo rm er USS R.
Afte r the d issolu tion of the USS R in Dece m·
ber 1991, Ru ss ia adopted a new Consti tution
o n 20 Dece mber 1993 a nd thus, establ ished a
new po litico-ad min istrative syste m .
The sa lien t feacu res of the Ru ssia n Constitutio n a re me ntio ned as fo ll ows:
J . It declares Russi a as a sove re ign and
mu lti-ethni c re pub li ca n state.
2. It prov ides for a federa l stMe. The Russian
Fede rat io n cons ists o f 21 Rep u b li cs,
6 Terri to ri es (KYlI i ), 49 Region s ( Obrast) ,
to Autono mous Areas (A utonomy Okrug ),

World Constitutions

2 Cities (Moscow and St. Petersburg) of
federal status, and Birobijan (Jewish
Autonomous Region).
3. It establishes a Hberal-democratic order
and guarantees fundamental rights to
the citizens. Thus, it discards the earHer
totaHtarian system.
4. It introduces multi-party system and
ensures free and fair periodic elections.
5. It provides for the division of the State
power among the legislature, executive,
and judiciary. These three organs are
independent of one another.
6. It establishes bicameral legislature (Federal
Assembly) consisting of Federation
Council (upper House) and State Duma
(lower House). The Federation Council
consists of 178 members, two from each
territorial units of the Russian Federation.
The State DUma consists of 450 members
who are directly elected for a period of
four years.
7. It declares President of the Russian
Federation as head of the State. The
President is elected for a term of four
years by universal and direct suffrage.
Hel she is head of the executive as well
as Commander-in-Chief of the armed
forces.
8. It authorises the President oftbe Republic
to appoint the Chainnan of the Government as the Prime Minister. The President
is to appoint other Federal Ministers on
the advice of the Prime Minister. Helshe
can also dismiss the Prime Minister or any
other Federal Minister.
9. It provides for a I9-member constitutional Court. Its function is to decide
the constitutionality of the Presidential
decrees, Government orders and laws of
the Federal Assembly.
10. It authorises the Russian legislature
(Federal Assembly) to remove the
President by way of impeachment, on
the charge of high treason or grave
crime. The resolution of impeachment
should be approved by both the Houses
by two-third majority.

'!1 689

t CHINESE CONSTITUTION
After the Communist Revolution (New Democratic Revolution) led by the Communist
Party of China (CPC) with Chairman Mao
Zedong as its leader, the People's Republic of
China was formed in 1949. Since then, China
adopted four constitutions i.e., in 1954, 1975,
1978 and 1982.
The fourth and the present constitution of
1982 was drafted by the National Constitution
Revision Committee set-up by the National
People's Congress (NPC). The draft constitution, after it was approved by the Standing
Committee of the NPC, was submitted to the
people for nation wide discussions. Finally,
the draft constitution was adopted by the NPC
and promulgated for implementation by the
announcement of the NPC on December 4,
1982. Its salient features are as follows:
1. Written Constitution

The Chinese Constitution is a written constitution. It consisted
(originally) of a Preamble and 138 Articles
divided into four chapters. These are mentioned
in Thble 92.4.
2. Rigid Constitution The Chinese Constitution is rigid in nature. It contains a special procedure for its amendment. It can be amended
by the NPC by a majority of two-thirds of its
membership. But, the amendments to the
constitution must be proposed either by the
Standing Committee of the NPC or by one-fifth
(or more) of the tqtai deputies (members) of
the NPC.
3. Socialist Constitution The Chinese Constitution is socialistic in nature and lays down
the foundation of a socialist state. It declares
that China is a sociaHst state governed by a
people's democratic dictatorship that is led
by the working class and based on an alliance
of workers and peasants. It further declares
that the socialist system is the fundamental
system of China; leadership by the cpe is the
defining feature of socialism with Chinese
Characteristics; and it is prohibited for any
organization or individual to damage the
socialist system.

690 ,~ Indian Polity
Table 92.4

Chinese Constitution at a Glance (as Amended till now).

Chapter Number

Chapter Headmg

Articles covered

General Principles

1 to 32

II

Fundament Rights and Obligations of Citizens

33 to 56

'"

State Institutions
Section 1 - The National People's Congress
Section 2 - The President of the People's Republic of China
Section 3 - The Stale Council
Section 4 - The Central Military Commission
Section 5 - Local People's Congresses al All Levels
and Local People's Governments
at All levels
Section 6 - Autonomous Organs of Ethnic
Autonomous Areas
Section 7 - Commissions of Supervision
Section 8 - People's courts and People's Procuratorates

5710140

The National Flag, National Anthem, National Emblem and the Capital

14110 143

,V

4. Unitary Constitution The Chi n ese Co nstitution establishes a unita ry state rather than a
fe dera l state. The Preamble declares that China
is a unitary multinational sta te built up joi n tly
by the people of all its nationalities, T here in
no division of powe rs between the cent-ral and
provincial governments. All powers are vested
on th e si ngle suprem e central gover nme n t located at Beijing. The provincial governmen ts
derive their authority from the delegation made
by the cen tral govemmel1l. They are created
or abolished by the cen tral gove rnment on ly
for administrative co nven ie nce.
5. Parliamentary Government Th e Ch in ese
constitu tio n provides for a parliamentary for m
of governme nt. According to th e co nstitution, th e State Cou n cil of China, namely, the
Central Peopl e's Government, is the executi ve
organ of the highest state organ of power (i.e.,
NPC) a nd it is the highest state administrat ive
organ. The State Council , headed by a Pre mier,
is respons ible to the Nr c and re po rts to the
NPC on its work. T he Prem ie r is choosen
by the NPC ba sed on the nomin ati on of th e
President of China a nd th e othe r members
of the State Cou ncil a rc choosen by t he NPC
based on t he nomin ation of the Prem ier. The
Presi dent of Ch ina, pursuant to decisions o f

the NPC, appoints or removes the P mie r
and other me mbers of the Sta te Cou nciL
Th e Premier di rects the work of the State
Cou n cil and presides over its meetings. But,
his/ h er authori ty can n ot be co m pared with
that of the India n Prime Minister or the Briti sh
Prim e Minister.
The head of the state, Le., the Presi den t
of Chin a, is an e lected executi ve. He/she is
elected by the NPC for a term of 5 years. Any
citizen of China wh o has the right to vote
a nd sta nd fo r electi0l1 and who has reached
the age of 45 is eli gi bl e for elect ion as the
Presi den t. However, the President is o nl y a
ce remoni al executive and not a real executive.
Hence, his/ h er authority ca nnot be compared
with th at o f t he America n Presi dent.
6. Unicameral ism The Ch inese constitutio n
provides for a un ica m eral 1eg islature, Le.,
the NPC. Constitu tio n ally, the NPC is the
highest state organ of power and exe rcises Ih e
legislative power of the State. It is composed
of deputies elected from the prov in ces, au~
tonomous reg io ns, cities directly under the
jurisd iction of cen tral gove rnment, special
admin istra ti ve regions and armed forces. The
number of deputies a nd the proced ures fo r
thei r election a re prescr ibed by law. He n ce,

World Constitutions

their number varies from time to time; it is
approximately 3,000. Th e NPC is elected for
a term of 5 years. Its permanent organ is the
Sta nding Committee consisting of approxi·
m ately 200 members.
7. Communist Party Leadership The Chinese
con stitution recognizes a multi party system in
the country. But, at the same time, it also clearly
establishes the leadersh ip role of the epe. The
Prea mbl e says that the syste m of multi·party
cooperation and political co nsultation under
the leadership of the CPC will co ntinue and
develop long into the future. It also says that
th e Chi n ese people of al1 ethn ic groups will
contin ue, under the leadership of the epc
and the guidance of Marxism·Leninism, Mao
Zedong. Thought, Deng Xiaoping Theory, the
Theory of Three Represents, the Scientific Out·
look on Development and Xi Jinping Thought
on Socialism with Chinese Characteri sti cs for
a New Era, to uphold the people's democrati c
leadersh ip, stay on the socialist road and develop the socialist market economy. Further,
Article 1 declares that leadership by the cpe is
the defining feature of socialism with Ch in ese
characteristi cs.
8. Democratic Centralism The Chinese con stitution declares that the state institutions shall
practice the principle of democratic centralism .
The NPC and th e local people's congresses at
all levels are created through democratic electi on a nd are respon sibl e to the people and
are also subject to th ei r oversight. Also, all
administrative, supervisory, adjudiciatory and
procuratorial organs of the state are created by
the p eople's congresses and are responsible to
them and aTe also subject to their oversight.
Further, the division of fun ctions and powers
between the ce ntral and local state institutions should honour th e principl e of giving
full play to the in itiative and motivation of
local authorities under the uni fied leadership
of the central authorities.
9. Fundamental Rights The constitution
provides for a large number of rights to the
citizens of Chin a. They include civiJ, political,

't!. 691

personal, economic, social and cultural rights.
But, the enjoyment of these rights by the citizens should not undermine the interests of the
state or society o r co llectives or the rights of
other citize n s. The list of righ ts is as follows:
(i) Right to equality before the law
(ii) Right to vote and sta nd for electio n
(ill) Freedom of speech, press, assembly, association, procession and demonstration
(iv) Freedom of reli gious belief
(v) Rights to inviolability of perso n a nd
house
(vi) Right to personal dignity
(vii) Freedom a nd co nfidenti a lit y of
corresponden ce
(viii) Right to criticize
(ix) Right to file co mpla ints
(x) Right to rece ive co mpensation
(xi) Right to work
(xii) Right to rest
(xiii) Right to livelihood of retirees
(xiv) Right to materia l assistan ce in old age,
sickn ess a nd disability
(xv) Right to edu cat ion
(xvi) Freedom of scientific resea rch, litera ry
and artistic creation and other cultural
pursuits.
(xvii) Right of women to enjoy equal rights
with men in all spheres of life: political,
economic, cultural, social and familial.
(xviii) Right to protection of marriage and
family
(xix) Protection of the rights of Ch inese
nationals living abroad
10. Fundamental Duties In addition to the
above fundamental ri ghts, the Chinese constitution also provides for the fundamental
duties of citizens. The constitution says that
every citizen must fulfill the duties prescribed
by it. These are as follows:
(i) 'Ib safeguard national unity and solidarity
(ii) 1b abide by the co nstitution and the
law, keep state secrets, protect public
property, observe discipline in the work
place, observe public order and resp ect
social morality.
(iii) 1b safeguard th e security, h onour and
interests of the motherland.

P

692

Indian Polity

(iv) To defe nd the mothe rland and res ist
aggre ssion
(v) 1b perfo rm mil ita ry servi ce o r join the
mili t ia
(vi) 1b pay taxes in accord a nce with law
(vi i) To work, rece ive educa tion and practi ce
fa m ily p lann in g

t SWISS CONSTITUTION
T ill now, Switze rland adopt ed three consti tutions, i.e. , 1848, ]874 a nd ] 999. The consti tution of 1848 establ i shed the fed eral sta te in
Switze rland . Thi s con stituti o n W,IS rep la ced
by the next co nst ituti on of 1874. After a long
per iod of J25 years, t hi s secon d co n stitut ion was replac ed by the third const ituti o n
o f 1999.
At prese nt, the thi rd co nstitu tion is co ntinui ng in Switze rland . It was adopte d by the
Federa l Assem b ly on 18th Decem ber, ] 998.
Subsequently, it was ap proved by the peop le and
Table 92.5
Tltte Number

the ca nto ns (i.e., stHtes) o n 18th Apri l, 1999,
finall y, it ca me in to force on 1st Janua ry, 2000.
Its sa lient featu res a re ex plaine d be low:
I. Writt en Const itutio n T he Swiss co nstitu ti o n is a comp rehe nsive wr itte n docum ent.
Origin a lly, it co n sisted of a prea mbl e a nd
196 Art icles divide d in to six titl es (i.e., parts) .
Th ese arc menti oned in Thble 92.5.

2. Rigid Const itutio n The Swiss Co nstitu tion is rigid in nature . It contai ns a specia l
proced ure for its a me ndm ent. It provid es for
two types of revis ion (a me ndme nt) i.e., tota l
rev is ion a nd pa rtia l revis ion :
(i) A to tal revis ion o f th e co nstitu tion may
be propo sed by the peopl e or by eithe r
of t he two c h a mb ers of t he Fed e ra l
Asse mbl y o r may be dec reed by th e
feder al Assem b ly. If the in itiativ e
e m(lna tes from th e peopl e or if th e two
c hamb ers are un able to agree, t hen
th e peo pl e will deci de on whe ther a

SwiSS Constitution at a Glance (as Amended till now).
Title Heading
Genera l Provisions

II

III

1 to 6

Fundamental Rights, Citizenship and social Goals
Chapte r 1 - Fundamental Rights
Chapte r 2 - Citizenship and Political Rights
Chapter 3 - Social Goals

7 to 41

Confederation, Cantons and Communes
s
Chapter 1 - Relations between the Confederation and the Canton
Chapter 2 - Powers
Chapter 3 - Financial System

42 to 135

IV

The People and the Cantons
Chapter 1 - Genera l Provisions
Chapter 2 - Initiative and Referendum

V

Federal AUlhorlties
Chapter 1 - General Provisions
Chapler 2 - Federal Assembly
Chapter 3 - Federal Council and Federal Administration
Chapter 4 - Federal Supreme Court and other Judicial Authorities

VI

Articles covered

Revision of the Federal Constitution and Transitional Provisions
Chapter I - Revision
Chapter 2 - Transitional Provisions

136 to 142

143 to 19k

192 to 197

World Constitutions

total revi sion should be ca rri ed out.
If the people vote for a total revision,
then new elections are held to both the
ch ambers.
(ii) A p artial revision of the constitution
may be requested by the p eopl e or may
be decreed by th e Federal Assembly.
The partial rev ision must respect the
prin ci pl e of cohesion of subj ect matter.
Further, the popular initiative for partial
revision mu st also respect the principle
of consiste n cy of form.
The totally revised or the partially rev ised
constitution comes into force when it IS
a pproved by the people and the ca nton s.
3. Federal Constitution The Swiss con stitution provides for a federal republic co n sisting of 26 units call ed as cantons. The powers
are divided between the federal governme n t
and the ca nton s. The powers of the fede ral
government are specified while the residuary
powers are given to the cantons as in th e case
of th e USA. Each canton h as its own co n st itutio n , legislature, executive and judiciary.
Th e canto n s are of two types, nam ely, fu11
ca ntons and h alf cantons. Out of th e total
26 canto ns, 20 are full can to ns and 6 a re
half canton s. The half canton s were formed
as a result of sp lit in the canto ns for settling
internal confli cts due to religion or lan guage
or some other factor. They differ in the following two respects:
(i) Each half ca nton has one representative in the upper house of th e Federal
Assembly whereas each full ca nton has
two representatives.
(ii) Each h alf ca nton has a half vote on
the proposals for total or partial revisio n (amendm ent) of the constitution
whereas each full ca n to n ha s one vote.
4. Council Model of Government The Swiss
con stitution provides for neither the British
parliamentary system of governm ent nor the
American presidential system of government.
It, on the other hand, provides for a unique
system of executi ve called as the Federal Council (Bundesrat) which is a plural (collegial)

~ 693

executive. The features of the Swiss Counci l
Model of Government are as fol1ows:
(i) The Federal Counci l has seven members who are elected by th e Federal
Assembl y following each genera l election to the Nation al Co un cil.
(ii) The members of the Federal Council are
elected for a term of four years. Any
Swiss citizen eligibl e for election to
the National Counci l may be elected
to the Federal Cou n cil.
(iii) In electing the Federal Council, care
must be taken to ensure that the vari ous geographical and language regions
of the cou ntry are appropriately
represented.
(iv) The President and the Vice-President of
the Federal Co uncil are elected by the
Federal Assembly from the members
of the Federal Council for a term of
one yea r. Re-election for the fo ll owing
year is not permitted. The President
may not be elected Vice-Presiden t for
the following year.
(v) The members of the Federal Council
act both coll ectively as well as indivi dually. Coll ective ly, they make al1
the executive decisions of the federal
government and individually, they act
as the h eads of the departments of the
federal government.
(vi) All the seve n members of the Federal
Co un ci l are vest ed with co-equal
auth ority. The President does not
possess any specia l powers. He/she is
on ly a primus inter pares (first among
equals). He/she acts as a nominal head
of th e Swiss federal republic and performs the ceremonial duti es. Hence,
hi s/her authority cannot be compared
with that of the British Prime Minister
or the American President.
(vii) The memb ers of the Federal Counci l
are n ot th e members of the Federal
Assembly. However, they partici pate
in the delib era tions of the Federal
Assembly but with ou t the right to vote.
Fu rther, they ca nnot be removed from

694 ,(1' Indian Polity
their office by the Federal Assembly
e ither by passing a motion of noco nfidence as in the case of British
Ca binet or by passing a resolution
of impeachment as in the case of
Ameri can President.
(viii) The Federal Co un cil is non-partisa n in
nature. It is comp osed of th e members
who belon g to different politica l parties. But, they do not work on party
lin es.
From the above, it is clear that the Swiss
exec uti ve is basically different from both, the
British executive and the Ameri can executive.
Accord ing to C.r. Stron g, the Swiss executive
syste m combines the merits and excl udes the
defects of both the parliamen tary an d presidential executive systems.
5. Bicameralism The Swiss Federal Legislature ca ll ed the Federal Assembly is bi camera l,
that is, it cons ists of two houses, nam ely, the
Co un ci l of Sta tes and th e Nat iona l Cou nc il.
The Cou n cil of States is the upper ho use
(c hamber) and while the National Cou nci l
is the lower hou se (chamber). The Co un ci l
of States is com posed of 46 representatives
of the ca n to ns. The full ca ntons elec t two
re prese ntati ves each wh ile the half cantons
elect one represe n tative each. This mea ns
that the ca ntons, irrespective of their s ize a nd
popul ati o n, are provided eq ual representation in the Co uncil of States li ke that of the
American Se nate. The ca nton s determine the
rul es for the election of their represe n tatives
to the Co un ci l of States. Hence, the mode of
election and the te nure of the represe ntatives
to the Council of States var ies fro m ca nton
to ca nton. In so me ca nton s, they arc elec ted
by the can tona l legislatures while in so me
other canto ns, th ey are e jec ted directly by
the people. Sim il arly, the ir tenure also varies
fro m one year to four years.
The Natio nal Counci l is co mposed of 200
representatives of the peop le. These repre·
se nta tives are elected directly by the peo pl e
according to a system of proportional representat ion . Their term of office is four years.
The two chambers in Switz.erland are of equa l

stan din g and have equal powers. C.F. Strong,
in this context, obse rved: NThe Swi ll legislature like the Swiss executive is uniqu e; it is
the on ly legislature in the world the powers
of whose upper house are in no way different
from those of the lower house".
6. Direct Democracy The Swiss co n stitu·
ti on provides for the operation of the direct
democracy a nd thereby enab les the peopl e to
directly participate in the affa irs of the state. rt
specifies two direct democratic devices, namely,
referendum and initiative. There are two types
of referendum - m andato ry and optional.
(i) Mandatory Referendum: The following
mu st be put to the vote of the people and
the ca nton s:
(a) Ame ndm ents to the co nstitution.
(b) Accession to organiz.ations for collective security or to su pran atio nal
co mmuniti es.
(c) Eme rgen cy federa l acts that a re
not based on a provision of the
constitution.
The following are sub mitted to a vote
of the peop le:
(a) Popular ini tiatives for a total revision
of the co nstitution.
(b) Popular ini tiatives for a partial revi·
sion of the con stituti on in the fo rm
of a genera l proposal that have bee n
rejected by the Federa l Assembly.
( c) The qu estion of whether a -::ota l revision of the co nstitution shou ld be
carried out, in the event that there
is di sagreeme nt b etwee n the two
chambers of the Fede ral Assembly.
(ii) Optional Referendum: If 50,000 voters
or e ight ca nton s request it, the following
are submitted to a vote of th e people:
(a) Federal acts.
(b) Eme rgency federal acts whose term
of va lidi ty exceeds o ne year.
(e) Federal decrees, if the co nstitution or
an act so requires.
(d) Internat ion al treaties of specified
ca tegories.
Under the co nsti tution , the device of initiative is all owed, at the federal level, only in the

World Constitutions

case of co nstitutional amendm en ts and not in
the case of federal laws or international treaties.
Any 1,00,000 voters may propose a total
revision of the constitution. Similarl y, any
1,00,000 voters may request a partial revi sion
of the constitution . A popular initiative for the
partial revision of the co nstitution may take the
form of a general proposal (i.e., unformulative
initiative) or of a specific draft of the provisions
. proposed ( i.e., formulative initiative).
7. Triple Citi zenship Under the Swiss constitution, the citizensh ip is three-fold , i.e., th e
citizensh ip of the commun e (mun icipali ty),
the ca nton and the federation . The constitution decla res that a ny person who is a citizen
of a commune and of the ca nton to whi ch
th at commune belongs, is a Swi ss citi zen .
This m ea ns th at no pe rson ca n be a ci tizen
of Switzerland with out being a ci ti zen of a
canton and no person can be a citi ze n of a
ca n ton without being a citize n of a co mmun e.
In Swi tzerland, th e communal citizensh ip is
rega rded as more valuable than the ca ntonal
and federal citi zenship.
8. Fundamental Rights The Swiss co nstitution conta ins an elaborate list of fund amental
rights of the citi zens. They in cl ude civil, social,
econom ic, poli tical and personal rights. These
are m entioned below:
(i) Protection of huma n digni ty
(ii) Right to equ ality befo re th e law
(iii) Protection aga inst arbitrary co nduct
and p r in ci ple of good faith
(iv) Right to .1ife and to personal freedom
(v) Protecti on of childre n an d youn g
people
(vi) Right to assistan ce wh en in n eed
(vii) Righ t to pri vacy
(viii) Ri gh t to marry and to have a fa mil y
(ix) Freedo m of relig ion and co nscien ce
(x) Fr ee d o m of ex pressio n a nd of
inform ation
(xi) Freedom of the m edi a
(xii) Freedom to use any la n guage

~ 695

(xiii) Righ t to basic edu cation
(xiv) Freedom of research a nd teachin g
(xv) Freedo m of artistic ex pression
(xvi) Freedom of assembl y
(xvii) Freedom of associ ation
(xviii) Freedom of domici le
(xix) Protection aga inst expUlsion, extradition and deporta tion
(xx) Right to property
(xxi) Eco n om ic freedom
(xxii) Ri ght to form profeSSional associations
(xxiii) Right to access to the courts
(xxiv) Righ t to peti t ion
(xxv) Poli tical rights
9. Social Goals of the Gover nment The Swiss
constitu tio n, in addition to the fund am en tal
rights of th e citizens, also contains the list of
socia l goals of th e governm en t. Th e federal
and ca nton al governm ents sh all endeavou r to
achi eve th ese social goals within the scope of
th eir co nsti tution al powers a nd the resources
ava ilable to them . But, no direct right to state
benefits may be establi sh ed on the basis of
these social goals. Th ese a re as follows:
(i) 1b ensure that eve ry person has access
to social security and th e health care.
(H) 1b ensure that families are protected and
en cou raged as communities of adults
and children .
( iii) 1b ensure that every person can earn
th e ir li ving by wo rking und er fa ir
conditions.
(iv) 1b ensu re th at every perso n can find
suitabl e acco mmodati on.
(v) 1b ensure that children and young people can obta in educa tio n a nd undergo
training.
(v i) 1b ensure tha t children and you n g
people are supported in th eir socia l,
cul tural and politica l integration.
(vii) 1b ensure th at every perso n is protected aga in st th e eco n o mi c co nsequen ces of old-age, invalidity, illness,
acc ident , un empl oy ment, mate rni ty,
being orphan ed and being widowed.

I

In this Part...
Appendix I Articles of the Constitution
Appendix II Subjects of Union, State ond
Concurrent lists
AppendIx III Table of Precedence
Appendix IV Constitutional Amendments
at a Glance

APPENDI
,

I

Appendix V Constitutional Amendments
wIth Reference to Articles
Appendix VI Flag Code of India
Appendix VII Presidents, Vice· Presidents,
Prime Ministers, etc.
Appendix VIII Chairpersons of the National
Commissions

Articles of the
Constitution (1-395)

~ UNION AND ITS TERRITORY

I. Name a nd territory of the union
2. Admission or establishment of new states
2A. Sikkim to be assoc iated with the Union

(Repealed)

3. For mation of new states and alteration of

areas, bou n daries or names of existi ng
states
4. Laws made u nder Articles 2 and 3 to provide for the amen dment of the First and
th e Fourth Schedules and supplemental,
incidental a nd consequential matters

~ CITIZENSHIP
5. Citizenship at the commencement of the

Constitution
6. Rights of citize n sh ip of certain persons who have migrated to India from
Pakistan
7 . Rights of citizensh ip of certain migrants
to Pakista n
8. Rights of citizen ship of certa in persons of
Indian origin residing outside India
9. Perso ns volunta rily acqu iring citizenship
of a foreign state n ot to be citizens

10. Cont in ua nce of the rights of citizenshi p
I I. Parliamen t to regulate the righ t of citi·
zensh ip by law

~ FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
12. Defin itio n of state
13. Laws incons istent with or in derogation
of the fundamenta l rights
14. Equality before law
15. Prohibition of discrimination on grounds
of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth
16. Equa li ty of op portu ni ty in matters of
public employmen t
17. Abolition of untouchability
18. Abol ition of titles
19. Protection of certa in rights regarding
freedo m of speech, etc.
2 0. Protect io n in respect of conviction for
offences
21. Protection of life and personal liberty
2IA. Right to elementary education
22 . Protection agai nst arrest and detention
in certain cases
23. Prohibit ion of traffic in hu man bei ngs
and forced lab ou r

-

Articles of the Constitution (1-395)

24. Prohib ition of emplo ymen t of ch ildren
in factor ies, etc.
25. Freed om of con scienc e a nd free pro·
fess ion, practi ce and propa gation of
religio n
26. Freed om to manag e religio us affairs
27. Freed om as to payme nt of taxes fo r promotio n of any pa rticul ar religio n
28. Freedom as to attend ance at religio us
instru ctio n or religious worsh ip in certain educa tional institu tions
29. Protec tion of inte rests of minor ities
30. Right of minor iti es to establ ish and
admin ister edu cation al institu tions
31. Co mpul so ry acqui sition of prope rty
(Repe aled)
31A . Saving oflaw s provid ing for acquis ition
of estates , etc.
31B. Validation of certa in acts and regula tion s
31C. Saving of laws giving effect to certa in
direct ive princi ples
31 D. Saving of laws in respec t of anti-n ationa l
activi ties (Repe aled)
32 . Remed ies for enforc ement of funda m ental rights includ ing writs
32A. Con stituti ona l validi ty of State laws not
to be co nsider ed in procee din gs under
article 32 (Repe aled)
33. Power of Parlia ment to modif y the fundame ntal rights in their a ppli cation to
forces, etc.
34 . Restri ction on funda menta l rights while
martia l law is in force in a ny area
35. Leg islatio n to give effect to so me of the
provis ions of funda me ntal rights

DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES
OF STATE POLICY
36. Defin ition of State
37. Appli cation of the direct ive prin ciples
38. State to secure a social orde r fo r the
promo tion of welfar e of th e peopl e
39. Certai n prin cipl es of policy to be followed by the State
39A. Equal justic e an d free lega l aid
40. Organ isatio n of villag e pa n chaya ts
41. Right to work, to educa tion, an d to publi c assista n ce in certai n cases

~ 697
"

42. Provis ion for just a nd huma ne cond itions of work and mater ni ty relief
43. Living wage, etc. for worke rs
43A. Partic ipatio n of worke rs in man ageme nt
of indus tries
438. Promo tion of co-ope rative societ ies
44. Unifo rm civ il code for the citize ns
45. Provis ion fo r ea rly childh ood ca re and
educa tion to childre n bel ow the age of
six yea rs
. 46. Promo tion of educa tional and econo mic
intere sts of sched ul ed castes, sch edul ed
tribes a nd othe r weake r secti on s
47. Duty of the state to raise the level of
nutrit ion a nd the standa rd of living
a nd to impro ve public h eal th
48. Organ isatio n of agricu lture and anima l
husba ndry
48A. Protec tion and impro vemen t of enviro nment a nd safegu arding of forests a nd
wild life
49. Protec tion of monu ments and places a nd
obj ects of nati onal impor tan ce
50. Separ at ion of j udi cia ry from execu tive
51. Pro motio n of inte rnatio nal peace a nd
securi ty

~ FUND AME NTA L DUTIES
51A. Funda menta l duties

~ PRESIDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENT
52. The Presid ent of India
53. Execu tive power of the Union
54. Electi on of Presid ent
55. Mann er of e lectio n of Presid ent
56. 'Term of office of Presid en t
57. Eligib iHty of re-ele ction
58. Quali ficatio ns for electi on as Presid ent
59. Co nditio n s of Pres ide nt's offi ce .
60. Oath or affi rm atio n by the Presid ent
61. Proce dure fo r im p each m e nt of the
Presid ent
62. Time of h olding electio n to fill vaca ncy
in the office of Presid ent and the term
of office of person e lected to fill casual
vacan cy
63. The Vice·P reside nt of India

698

,r;J Ind;an Pal""

64. The Vi ce-President to be ex-officio chairman of the co un cil of sta tes
65. The Vice-P resi de nt to act as Preside nt
or to d ischarge his fun ct ion s duri ng
casua l vaca ncies in the office, or during
the abse nce, of President
66 . Election of Vicc-Presi dent
67. Thrm of offi ce of Vice-Preside nt
68. Time of holding election to fi ll vacancy
in t he office of Vice-President and the
te rm of office of perso n elected to fill
ca sua l vaca n cy.
69 . Oath or affirmation by the Vice-President
70. Discharge of President's functions in
ot her co ntinge n c ies
71. Matters relating to , or conn ected with, the
election of a President or Vice-President
72. Power of the President to grant pardons,
etc" and to suspe nd, re mit or com mute
sentences in certain cases
73 . Extent of executive power of the Union

UNION MINISTERS AND
ATTORNEY GENERAL
74. Co uncil of mi n isters to aid and advise

Pres ident

75. Other provision s as to mini sters
76. Attorney·General for lnd ia

77. Condu ct of bu sin ess of the Govern ment
of India
78. Duti es of Prim e Minister as respects
the furni sh i ng of information to the
Pres ide n t, etc.

t PARLIAMENT
79. Constitution of Pa rl iament
80 . Co mposition of the coun c il of sta tes
81. Composition of the House of the peo pl e
82. Readjustment a fter each cen sus
83. Duration of Ho uses of Parl iament
84. Qualification for members h ip of
Parl ia ment
85. Sess ion s of Parliament. prorogat ion and
di ssolutio n
86. Righ t of Presid e nt to address and se nd
messages to Houses
87. Spec ial address by the Pres ide nt

88. Rights of mini sters and Attorney Ge nera l
as resp ects i-louses
89. The chairman a nd depu ty cha irm an of
the co un c il of sta tes
90. Vacation and resignation of, and remova l
from, the office of deputy chairma n
91. Power of the Deputy Cha irman or other
person to perform th e duties of the
office of, or to act as, Cha irm a n
92. The Cha irman or the De puty Chai rman
not to pres ide whi le a re so lution
for hi s removal from oft1c e is under
consideration
93. The Spea ker and Deputy Spea ker of the
i-louse of the peop le
94. Vacation and res ignation of, and removal
from. the offices of Spea ker and Deputy
Spea ker
95. Power of t he Deputy Speaker or other
pe rso n to perform the dut ies of the
office of, o r to act as. Speake r
96 . The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker not to
preside while a resolution for h is removal
from office is under co nsideration
97. Sa laries and a ll owan ces of the Chairm an
and Deputy Cha irma n a nd th e Speaker
and Deputy Spea ker
98. Secreta riat of Parl iament
99. Oath or affirmation by me mbers
] 0 0. Voting in Houses, power of Ho uses to act
notwi thstanding vacancies and quorum
101. Vacation of scats
102. Disqual ifications for me mbe rship
103. Decision on question s as to disqualifica·
tions of mem bers
104. Pena lty for sitting and voting before mak·
ing oath or affirmation under Article 99 or
when not qua lified or wh en disqualified
105. powers, priv ileges, etc., of the Ho uses of
Parliame nt and of the members and
co mmittees thereof
106. Sa laries and a ll owances of m e mbers
107. Provi sion s as to introduc tio n and pa ss·
ing of bi ll s
J08 . Joint s itt ing of bo th HOll ses in ce rta in
CHses
109. Spec ia l procedure in res pect of mo ney
bi ll s
110. Defi nition of 'money b ill s'

I

Articles of the Constitution ( 1-395)

Ill. Assent to bills

11 2. Annu al fin a ncial statem ent (budget)

11 3 . Procedure in Parli a ment with resp ect

\

to estim ates

11 4 . Appropriatio n bills
11 5 . Suppl ementa ry, additional or excess

grants
11 6. Votes on account , vo tes of cred it a nd
exce ptional grants
11 7. Special prov ision s as to fin an cial bi11s
118. Rul es of procedu re
11 9. Regul a tion by law of procedure in
Pa rli a men t in relation to fin a ncial
business
120: Lan guage to be used in Parli a me nt
121. Restriction on di scussion in Parliament
122. Courts n ot to inquire in to proceedin gs
of Pa rl iam en t
123. Power of President to pro mulgate ordinances durin g recess of Pa r1ia ment

t SUPREME COURT

(

I

,
,

124 . Establishm e n t. a nd Co n stituti o n of
Su pre me Court
] 24A. Na tional Judi c ial ApPoin t m e nt s
Comm ission
1248. Fun ctions of Commiss ion
] 24C. Power of Parliam ent to make law
] 25. Salari es, etc., of judges
126. Appointm ent of acting chief justice
127. Appoin tm ent of adhoc j udges
128. Attendan ce of retired judges at sittings
of the Supre me Court
] 29. Supre me Court to be a court of record
130. Sea t of Suprem e Court
13]. Ori ginal jurisdiction of th e Supreme
Court
131 A. Excl usive jurisdiction of the Suprem e
Court in rega rd to question s as to the
constitutional validity of Central Laws
(Re pealed)
132. Appellate jurisdiction of Suprem e Court
in a ppeals fro m high cou rts in certa in
cases
133. Appellatejurisdiction of Suprem e Court
in a ppeals from high co urts in regard
to civ il matte rs

~ 699

134. Appellatejurisdiction of Supreme Court
in rega rd to criminal matters
134A. Certifica te for appea l to the Supreme
Court
135. Juri sdictio n and powe rs of the federal
court under existing law to be exercisa bl e by the Suprem e Cou rt
136. Special leave to a ppeal by the Supreme
Court
137. Rev iew of judgemen ts or orders by the
Suprem e Cou r t
138. Enla rgement of the jurisdicti on of th e
Suprem e Co urt
J 39. Co n fe rm ent on the Supreme Court of
powers to issue" certa in wri ts
139A . n-an sfer of certain cases ' ,- ~ _
140 . An cill ary powe rs of Supreme Cou rt
] 41. Law decl a red by Supreme Court to be
binding on all courts
142 . En fo rce men t of decrees and o rders of
Suprem e Court and orders as to discovery, etc.
143. Power of Presiden t to consul t Supreme
Co urt
] 44. Civil and j udicial auth orities to act in
aid of th e Supreme Court
J 44A . Special proy isio n s. as to di sposal of
question s- rel ating to con stitution al
va lidity of laws (Repealed)
145. Rul es of court, etc.
146. Officers and servants and the expenses
of the Supreme Court
147. Interpretation

COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA
148. Comptroller and Audi tor Gen eral of
India
149. Duties and powers of the Co mptroller
and Auditor Ge neral
I SO. Form of accounts of th e Union and of
th e states
151. Audit reports

t GOVERNOR

152. Defi ni tion of state
153. Governo rs of states

700

,rfY Indian Polity

154 . Executive power of state
155. Appo intment of governor
J 56. Thrm of office of gove rnor

157. Qua li ficat io ns for a p point me nt as
governor
158. Co nd iti on s of gove rnor's offi ce
J 59. Oath or affirmatio n by the governo r
160 . Discharge of the fun ctio ns of the gover·
nor in certa in co nti ngenc ies
161. Power of governor to gra nt pardons, etc. ,
and to suspend, re mit o r com mu te
se nte nces in certain cases
J 62 . Exte nt of executive power of state

STATE MINISTERS AND
ADVOCATE GENERAL
163 . Coun c il of mini sters to aid a nd a dvise

governor
164. Othe r prov isions as to ministers
165. Advoca te Gen eral (o r the st<lie
166. Co ndu ct of business of the gove rnm ent
of a state
167. Dut ies of chi ef mini ster as res pec ts
t he fu rni s h i n g of in for ma tio n to
Governor, e tc.

t STATE LEGISLATURE
168. Co nstitu tion of legi sla tures in states
169. Aboli tion or c reation of leg islati ve
counci ls in states
170. Co mposition of the legislative assembl ies
171. Co mpos ition of the leg islative cou nci ls
172 . Duration of state legislatures
173. Qualificatio n for me mbe rship of the
state leg islature
174 . Sessions of the state leg isla ture, proroga·
tion and di sso luti o n
175. Right of gove rn or to add ress a nd se nd
messages to the Hou se of Houses
176. Special address by the gove rn or
177. Right s of min isters a nd Advocate
Gen era l as respects th e Houses
178. The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the
legislati ve asse mbly
179. vacatio n and res ig n at ion of, and
removal from, the offi ces of Speake r
and Dep uty Speaker

180. Power of th e Deputy Speaker or othe r
pe rso n to perfor m the duties of t he
office of, or to act as, speaker
181. Th e Speake r o r th e Deputy Speaker
not to pre s ide whil e a reso lu t ion
for hi s re moval from office is und e r
co ns ideration
] 82. T he Chairman a nd De puty Chairman
of th e leg islative counc il
183 . Va c ation and res igna ti o n of, a nd
remova l from, the offices of Cha irm a n
a nd Deputy Chairman
184. Power of the Deputy Chairman or other
perso n to perform the duti es of t he
office of, or to act as, Cha irma n
185. The Chairma n or the Deputy Chainn a n
n ot to pres ide whil e a reso lut io n
fo r hi s remova l frol11 office is unde r
cons ideratio n
186. S.1laries and a llowa nces of the Speaker
and Deputy Speake r a nd the Chairman
a!ld De puty Cha irma n
187. Sec re tariat of sta te leg islature
188. OatJl or affirmati o n by me mbe rs
189. Voti ng in Houses, power of I·louses to act
notwithsta nding vacancies a nd quomm
190. Vacation of seats
19] . Di squ a l ificat ions fo r me mbe rship
192. Decisio n 0 11 questions as to disqua lifi ca·
tio ns of me mbe rs
193. Pena lty for sitting and voting befo re
makin g oath or affirmation under
Article 188 or when not qualified or
when d isqua li fied
1 94. Powers, privi leges, etc, of the 1·louse o f
legis La tures a nd of the membe rs and
co mmittees the reof
195. Sa lar ies a nd a ll owa nces of members
196. Provisio ns as to in troductio n and pass·
in g of bills
197. Restriction on powers of legisla ti ve coun·
cil as to bills other than money bills
198. Spec ia l procedure in respect of mon ey
bi ll s
199. De fini tion of 'mon ey bi ll s'
200. Asse nt to bill s
201. Bills reserved fo r co nsideratio n of t he
Preside nt

,

Articles of the Constitution (1-395)

202. Annual financial statement
203. Procedure in legislature with respect to
estimates
204. Appropriation bills
205. Supplementary, additional or excess
grants
206 . Votes on account, votes of credit and
exceptional grants
207. Special prov.i sions as to financial bills
208. Rules of procedure
209. Regulation by law of procedure in the
legislature of the state in relation to
financial business
210. Language to be used in the legislature
211. Restriction on discussion in the
legislature
212. Courts not to inquire into proceedings
of the legislature
213. Power of governor to promulgate ordinances during recess of legislature

t HIGH COURTS

:

"

(•

214. High courts for states
. 215. High courts to be courts of record
216. Constitution of high courts
2]7. Appointment and con~itions of the
, ;" . 'offic~ of a judge of a high court
218. Application of certain provisions relating to Supreme Court to high courts
219. Oath or affirmation by judges of high
courts
220. Restriction on practice after being a
permanent judge
221. Salaries etc., of judges
222. 1tansfer of a judge from one high court
to another
223_ Appointment of acting chief justice
224. Appointment of additional and acting
judges
224A. Appointment of retired judges at sittings of high courts
225. Jurisdiction of existing high courts
226. Power of high courts to issue certain
writs
226A. Constitutional validity of Central laws
not to be considered in proceedings
under .Article 226 (Repealed)

~ 701

227. Power of superintendence over al1
courts by the high court
228. Transfer of certain cases to high court
228A. Special provisions as to disposal of
questions relating to constitutional
validity of State Laws (Repealed)
229. Officers and servants and the expenses
of high courts
230. Extension of jurisdiction of high courts
to union territories
23] . Establishment of a common high court
for two or more states
232. Interpretation (Repealed)

t SUBORDINATE COURTS

233. Appointment of district judges
233A. Validation of appointments of, and
judgements, etc., delivered by, certain
district judges
234. Recruitment of persons other than district judges to the judicial service
235. Control over subordinate courts
236. Interpretation
237. Application of the provisions of this
chapter to certain class or classes of
magistrates

STATES IN PART B OF THE FIRST
SCHEDULE (REPEALED)
238. Application of provisions of Part VI to
States in Part B of the First Schedule
(Repealed)

t UNION TERRITORIES
239. Administration of union territories
239A. Creation of local legislatures or counci l of ministers or both for certain
union territories
239AA. Special provisions with respect to
Delhi
239AB. Provision in case of failure of constitutional machinery
239B. Power of administrator to promulgate ordinances during recess of
legislature

702

P

Indian Polity

240. Power of the President to make regulations for ce rtain union territories
241. High courts fo r union territor ies
242. Coorg (Repea led )

t PANCHAYATS
243. Defin itio n s
243A . Gram sahha
243B. Con stitution of panchayats
243C. Co mpositio n of pa n chayats
243D . Rese rvation of SC<:l ts
243E. Duration of pan chayats, etc.
243F. Disqualifications for members hip
243G. Powers , authority and respon sibiliti es

of p a I1c hayats
2431-1. Powers to impose taxes by. and funds
of, the panchaya ts
243 1. Constitu tion offi nanceco mmi ssio l1 to
review fina ncia l position
243J . Audit of acco un ts ofpa n ch ayats
243K. Elect ions to t he panchayats
243L. App lication to union terr ito ries
243M . Part not to a ppl y to certai n area s
243N . Cont inuan ce of ex isting laws and
pan c hayats
2430. Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters

t MUNICIPALITIES
243P.
243Q.
243R.
243S.
243T.
243U.
243V.
243W.
243X .
243Y.
243Z.
Z43ZA.
243ZB.
243ZC.

Definitions
Constitu tio n of m unicipalit ies
Co mposition of mun icipa lities
Const it u tio n and co mp os i tion of
wards co mmi ttees) etc.
Reservation of seats
Duration of muni cipal iti es, etc.
Disqualifications for m embership
Powers, authority a nd responsib il ities
of municipalit ies, etc.
Power to impose taxes by, a nd fund s
of, t he muni c ipalit ies
Finance commi ss io n
Audit of acco un ts of municipalities
Elect ions to the municipalit ies
Appli cat ion to unio n territories
Part not to app ly to ce rtain areas

243Z0. Co mmittee fo r district planning
243ZE. Com m ittee for metropolitan plann ing
243ZF. Co nti n ua n ce of existing laws a nd
municipa l ities
243ZG. Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters

t CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES

243ZH. Defin iti ons
Z43Z I. J nco rporation of co-operative societies
243ZJ . Nu mber and term of m embers of
Board and its office bearers
243ZK. Election of members of Board
243ZL. Supersession and suspension of Board
an d inter im ma nagement
243Z1H. Audit of accounts of co-operative
soc ieti es
243ZN. Conve nin g ofgc neral body meet ings
243Z0. Right of a member to get information
243ZP. Return s
243ZQ. Offences and penalti es
243ZR. Ap plication to multi-Sta te co-o perative
societies
243ZS. Application to Unio n territories
243ZT. Conti n ua n ce of ex isting laws

t SCHEDULED AND TRIBAL AREAS

244. Adm i n istration of scheduled areas a nd
triba l a reas
244A. Formation of an autonomous state
compris i ng certain trib a l a reas i n
Assam and creation of local legislatu re
or counci l of ministers or both therefor

-l CENTRE- STATE LEGISLATIVE
. RELATIONS

245. Extent of laws made by Parliament an d
by the legislatures of states
246. Subj ect-m atter of laws made by Parliament and by t he legislatures of states
246A. Special provision with respect to goods
a nd services tax
247. Power of Parliament to provide for the
esta bli shme n t of certai n addit iona l
courts
248. Residuary powers of legislation

Mieles o(the Cons"w"on (1-395 )

249. Power of Parlia ment to legisla te with
respec t to a matte r in the State List in
the nation al intere st
250. Power of Parlia ment to legisl ate with
respec t to any matte r in the State List
if a procla matio n of em ergen cy is in
opera tion
251. In con sisten cy betwe en laws made by
Parlia ment under article s 249 and 250
and laws made by the legisl atures of
states
252 . Power of Parlia ment to legisla te for two
or more states by conse nt and adoption of such legisla tion by any other
state.
253. Legisl ation for giving effect to intern ational agree ments
254. In con sisten cy betwe en laws made by
Parlia ment and laws made by the legislatu res of states
255. Requi remen ts as to recom mend ations
and previo us sa n ctions to be regard ed
as matte rs of proce dure only

CEN TRE- STATE
ADMINISTRATIVE RELATIONS
256. Oblig ation of states and the Union
257. Contro l of the Union over states in certain cases
257 A. Assist ance to States by deplo ymen t
of armed forces or other forces of the
Unio n (Repe aled)
258. Power of the Union to confe r powers,
etc., on states in certa in cases
258A. Power of the states to entrus t functi ons
to the union
259. Arme d Forces in States in Part B of the
First Sched ule (Repe aled)
260 . Jurisd iction of the Union in relatio n to
territo ries outsid e India
261. Publi c acts, recor ds and judic ial
proce eding s
262 . Adjud icatio n of dispu tes relatin g to
water s of inter- state rivers or river
valley s
263. Provis ions with respec t to an inter-s tate
counc il

~, 703

CEN TRE- STAT E FINA NCIA L
RELATIONS
264. Interp retatio n
265. Th.xes not to be imposed save by author ity of law
266. Conso lidated Funds and public accou nts
of India and of the states
267. Conti ngenc y Fund
268. Duties levied by the Union but conec ted
and a pprop riated by the states
268A. Servic e tax levied by Union and collected and appro priate d by the Union
and the states (Repe aled)
269. laxes levied and collec ted by the Union
but assign ed to the states
269A. Levy and collec tion of goods and services tax in cours e of inter- state trade
or comm erce
270. Thxes levied and distributed between the
Union and the states
271. Surch arge on certai n duties and taxes
for purpo ses of the Union
272. Th.xes which are levied and collec ted
by the Union and may be distrib uted
betwe en the Union and the States
(Repe aled)
273. Grant s in lieu of expor t duty on jute
and jute produ cts
274. Prior recom menda tion of the Presid ent
requir ed to bills affect ing taxati on in
which states are intere sted
275 . Grant s from the Union to certai n states
276. laxes on profes sions, trades , ca llings
and employmen ts
277. Savings
278. Agree ment with States in Part B of the
First Sched ule with regard to ce rtain
financ ial matte rs (Repe aled)
279. Calcu lation of n et procee ds, etc.
279A. Goods and Servic es lax Counc il
280. Finan ce Comm ission
281. Reco mmen datio ns of the finan ce
comm ission
282. Expen diture defrayable by the Union or
a state out of its reven ues
283. Custody, etc., of conso lidated funds, contingen cy funds and moneys credit ed to
th e public accou nts

I
I
I
I

I

I
I
I
I

I

I
I

I

I
I

704

t7

Indian Polity

284 . Custody of su itors' dep osits and othe r
mon eys rece ived by publ ic serva nts
and courts
285. Exe mptio n of p rope rty of th e Un io n
from sta te taxa tio n
286. Restri ctio ns as to impositio n of tax o n
the sa le or purchase of goods
287. Exe mpt io n fro m taxes on e lect ricity
288. Exe mptio n fro m taxati on by states in
resp ect of wate r or e lect ri city in ce rta in cases
289. Exe mp ti o~ of p roperty a nd in com e of
a state fro m Un ion taxa tio n
290. Adju st m e nt in resp ect o f certa i n
ex pe n ses a nd p e n sion s
290A. Ann ua l p aym en t to certai n devaswo m
funds
291. Pri vy purse sums of Rul ers (Repea led)
292. Borrowin g by the Govern men t of Ind ia
293. Bo rrowi ng by states

RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT
294. Succession to property, assets, righ ts, liabilities and obliga tions in ce rtain cases
295. Succession to property, assets, rights,
liab il iti es and obl iga tions in other cases
296. Property accruin g by esc hea t or la pse
or bo na vaca ntia
297. Th ings of value withi n territoria l waters
or co ntin enta l shelf and resources of
the exclus ive eco no mi c zo ne to vest in
the Un io n
298 . Power to carryo n trade, etc.
299. Co n trac ts
300 . Sui ts a n d proceedings

t RIGHT TO PROPERTY
300A. Perso ns n ot to be de prived of prope rty
save by a utho ri ty of law

TRADE, COMMERCE
AND INTERCOURSE
301. Freedo m of t ra de, com m e r ce a nd
interco urse
302 . Power of Parlia ment to impose restrictions
on trade, com merce and in tercourse

303. Restricti ons o n t he legislat ive powers
of th e Uni o n a nd of the states wi th
regard to trade and co mm erce
304. Restrictio ns on trade, com merce a nd
in terco urse am ong states
305. Saving of ex isti ng laws and laws prov iding fo r sta te mo n opoli es
306. Powe r of ce rta in States in Part B of the
First Schedul e to impose restr ictions
on trade a n d co mm erce ( Repealed)
307. Appoin tme nt of autho ri ty fo r ca rry ing
out the purposes of Arti cles 301 to 304

t PUBLIC SERVICES
308. In te rpretatio n
309. Recru itmen t and cond itio ns of service
of pe rso ns se rvin g the Uni o n or a
state
310. le nure of office of perso ns serving the
uni o n or a state
311. Dism issal, remova l or red uction in rank
of perso ns em pl oyed in civil ca pac ities
un der the Un io n or a sta te
312. All-Ind ia services
3] 2A. Power of Pa rli ame n t to va ry or revoke
co ndi tio ns of se rvice of office rs of
ce rta in serv ices
313. Tra n sition al provis io ns
314. Prov is io n fo r pro tection of exis tin g
office rs of ce rtai n se rv ices ( Repea led)

t PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSIONS
315. Publ ic Service Co mmi ss io ns for th e
Uni o n a nd fo r the states
3]6. Appo in tm en t an d ter m of office of
me mbe rs
317. Remova l a nd suspen sio n ofa mem ber
of a Publ ic Service Comm iss ion
318. Power to make regulations as to conditio n s of serv ice of members a nd staff
of th e co mmi ssio n
319. Prohib itio n as to the holdin g of offices
by me mbe rs of the com mi ss ion o n
ceas in g to be such me mbers
320. Fu nctions of Public Service Comm issions
321. Power to extend fun ctio ns of Publ ic
Se rvice Com mi ssio ns

J
f

Articles ,(the ConstiMon (1-395)

322. Expenses of Public Service Commissions
323. Reports of Public Service Commissions

t TRIBUNALS
323A. Administrative tribunals
323B. Tribunals for other matters

t ELECTIONS

324. Superintendence, direction and control
of elections to be vested in an Election
Commission
325. No person to be ineligible for inc1usion in,
or to claim to be included in a special,
electoral roll on grounds of religion,
race, caste or sex
326. Elections to the House of the people and
to the legislative assemblies of states to
be on the basis of adult suffrage
327. Power of Parliament to make provision
with respect to elections to legislatures
328. Power oflegislature of a state to make
provision with respect to elections to
such legislature
329. Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters
329A. Special provision as to elections
to Parliament in the case of Prime
Minister and Speaker (Repealed)

SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING
TO CERTAIN CLASSES
330. Reservation of seats for scheduled castes
and scheduled tribes in the House of
the people
331. Representation of the anglO-Indian
community in the House of the people
332. Reservation of seats for scheduled castes
and scheduled tribes in the legislative
assemblies of the states
333. Representation of the anglO-Indian
community in the legislative assemblies of the states
334. Reserv:ation of seats and special repre·
s~ntation to cease after certain period
335. Claims of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes to services and posts

'tJ. 705

336. Special provision for anglo-Indian community in certain services
337. Special provision with respect to educa·
tional grants for the benefit of angloIndian community
338. National Commission for scheduled castes
338A. National Commission for scheduled tribes
338B. National Commission for Backward
Classes
339. Control of the Union over the administration of scheduled areas and the
welfare of scheduled tribes
340. Appointment of a commission to investigate the conditions of backward classes
341. Scheduled castes
342. Scheduled tribes
342A. Socially and educationally backward
classes

t OFFICIAL LANGUAGE
343. Official language of the Union
344. Commission and committee of
Parliament on official language
345. Official language or languages of a state
346. Official languages for communication
between one state and another or
between a state and the Union.
347. Special provision relating to language
spoken by a section of the population
of a state
348. Language to he used in the Supreme Court
and in the high courts and for acts, bills,
etc.
349. Special procedure for enactment of
certain laws relating to language
350. Language to be used in representations
for redress of grievances
350A. Facilities for instruction in mothertongue at primary stage
350B. Special officer for linguistic minorities
351. Directive for development of the hindi
language

t EMERGENCY PROVISIONS
352 . Procla~ation of emergency (national
emergency)
353. Effect of proclamation of emergency

,.

706

P

Indian Polity

354 . Application of provisions relating to

distribution of revenues while a proclamation of emergency is in operation
355. Duty of the Union to protect states
against external aggression and internal disturbance
356 . Provisions in case offailure ofconstitutiona l machinery in stLltCS ( President's
rule)
357. Exerci se of leg islative powers under
proclamation issued under article 356
358. Suspe nsion of provisions of Article 19
during emerge ncies
359. Suspens ion of the en force ment of funda mental rights during emergencies
359A. App li cation of thi s Part to the State of
Punjab ( Repealed)
360 . Provisions as to financial emergency

t MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

361. Protection of the President and gover-

nors and rajpra mukh s
361 A. Protection of publication of proceedings
of Parliament and state legislatufCs
36] B. Disqualification for appoi ntm e nt 0 11
remune rat ive po liti ca l post
362. Rights and privileges of rulers of Indi a n
States (Repealed)
363. Bar to interference by courts in disputes
aris ing out of certain treaties, agreements, etc.
363A. Recognition granted to rulers of Indian
states to cease and privy purses to be
abolished
364 . Special provisions a s to major ports and
aerodromes
365. Effect of failure to co mpl y with , or to
give effect to directions given by the
Un ion (Presi dent's rule)
366. Definitions
367. Interp retat ion

r

AMENDMENT OF
THE CONSTITUTION

368. Powe r of Parliament to amend the

Constitu tion and procedure therefor

TEMPORARY, TRANSITIONAL
AND SPECIAL PROVISIONS
369. Temporary power to Parliament to make

laws with res pect to certa in ma t te rs in
the State Li st as if they were ma tters
in the Conc urrent List
370 . Temporary provisions with respect to
the State of .Ja mmu and Kashm i r
371. Specia l provision \'Ilith respect to [he
States of Maharashtra and Guj arat
371A. Special provi sion with respect to the
State of Nagaland
3718. SpeCial provi sion with respect to the
State of Assam
371C. Special provi s ion with respect to the
State of Manipur
371 D. Spec ia l provis ions with respect to th e
Sl..:'1te of Andhra Pradesh or tne state
of Tela n ga na
371E. Establishment of central unive rsi ty in
A ndhra Pradesh
371 F. Special provision with respect to the
State of Sikkim
371 G. Special provi sion with respect to the
State of Mizoram
371 H. Special provi s ion with respect to the
State of Arunacha l Pradesh
3711. Specia l provision with respect to the
State of Goa
371J . Specia l provision with respect to the
State of Karnataka
372. Cont inuan ce in force of existing laws
a nd their adaptation
372A. Power of t he President to adapt laws
373 . Power of the President to make o rder
in respect of persons und er preve ntive
detention in certain cases
374. Provisions as to judges of the fedcra~
court and proceedings pending in th e
federa l court or before His Majesty in
co un c il
375. Courts, a uthorities and officers to COfltinue to fu nction subject to the provis ions of the Con stitution
376. Provisions as to judges of high courts
377. Provisions as to Comptro ller and Auditor
Genera l of India

,
"

r

Articles o(the Constitution (1-395)

378. Provisions as to Public Service
Commissions
378A. Special provisions as to duration of
Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly
379. Provisions as to provisional ParJjament
and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker
thereof (Repealed)
380. Provisions as to President (Repealed)
381. Council of Ministers of the President
(Repealed)
382. Provisions as to provisional Legislatures
for States in Part A of the First Schedule
(Repealed)
383. Provisions as to Governors of Provinces
(Repealed)
384. Council of Ministers of Governors
(Repealed)
385. Provisions as to provisional Legislatures
in States in Part B of the First Schedule
(Repealed)
386. Council of Ministers for States in Part
B of the First Schedule (Repealed)
387. Special provision as to detennination of
popUlation for the purposes of certa-i n
elections (Repealed)

~ 707

388. Provisions as to the fining of casual
vacancies in the provisional Parliament
and provisional Legislatures of the
States (Repealed)
389. Provisions as to Bills pending in the
Dominion Legislature and in the
Legislatures of Provinces and Indian
States (Repealed)
390. Moneys received or raised or expenditure incurred between the commencement of the Constitution and the 31st
day of March, 1950 (Repealed)
391 . Power of the President to amend the
First and Fourth Schedules in certain
contingencies (Repealed)
392. Power of the President to remove
difficulties

TSHORT TITLE, COMMENCEMENT,

l ETC.

393. Short title
394. Commencement
394A. Authoritative text in the hindi language
395. Repeals

APPENDIX:

II

t UNION LIST (LIST-I)
1. Defence of India
2. Naval , military and air forces; any other
armed forces of the Union
2A. Deployment of any armed force of the
Union in any state in aid of the civil powe r
3. Canto nm ent areas and loca l self·govern.
ment in such areas
4. Nava l, military and air force works
5. Arms, firearms, ammunition, and explosives
6. Atomic energy and m in eral resources
necessary for its production
7. Defence indu stries

8. Centra l Bureau of Intelligence and
investigation

9. Prevent ive detention for rcasons conneeted with defen ce, foreign affairs, or
the security of India

10. Foreig n affa i rs

11 . Diplomatic , c onsu lar and trade
representation

12. United Nat ions Organisation

13. Internationa l con ferences, associations
and other bodies
14. Treaties, agreem en ts and co nvention s
with foreign countries
15. War and peace
16. Fore ig-n jurisdiction
17. Citi zenship, naturali sation and aliens
18. Extradition
19. Passports and visas
20. Pilgrimages to places outside India
21. Pira cies a nd crimes co mmitted on the
high seas or in the air and offen ces
again st the law of nations.
22. R.:"1ilways

Subjects of
Union, State and
Concurrent Lists
23. National highways
24. Sh ip ping and navigation on nat ion a l
w<lterways
25. Maritime shipping and navigation
26. Lighthouses for the safety of shippi ng an d
aircraft
27. Maj or ports
28. Port quarantine, seaman and ma rine
hospitals
29. Airwaysj aircraft and air navigation; provis io n of aerod ro mes
30. Carriage of passengers and goods by rail ~
way, sea, air or national waterways
31. Posts a nd telegraphs; telephones, wireless, broadcasting a nd other like forms
of communication
32. Property of the Union
33. (Omitted)
34. Courts of wards for the estates ofmleTS of
Indian states
35. Public debt of the Union
36. Currency, coinage and legal tenderj foreig n exchange
37. Foreign loans
38. Reserve Bank of India
39. Post office savings bank
40. Lotteries orga nised by the Union or state
41. Trade and commerce with foreign countries
42. Inte r-sta te trpde and commerce
43. fuding corporations, including banking,
insurance a nd fina ncial corporatio n s
but not including co~o p e rative societies
44. Corporations, whether tra ding or not,
with objects not co nfin ed to one state
45. Banking
46. Bills of exchange, cheq ues, promisso ry
notes and other like instrume nts

.

,

l

Sub"ects o(Un;on. State and Concurrent Urn

47. Insuran ce
48. Stock exchanges and futures markets
49. Patents, inventions and designs; copyright; trade-marks and merchandi se
marks
50. Establishment of standards of weight and
measure
51. ESlablishment of standards of quality
for goods to be exported out of India or
transported from one state to another
52. .Industries, the control of which by the
Union is in the public interest
53. Oil fields and mineral oil resources;
petl"Oleum and petroleum produ cts;
other liquids and substan ces which are
inflammable
54. Regulation of mines and mineral development in the public interest
55. Regulation oflabour and safety in min es
a nd oil fields
56. Regulation and development of inter-state
rivers and river valleys
57. Fishing and fisheries beyond territorial
waters
58. Manufacture. supply and distribution of
salt by Union a nd other agencies
59. Cultivation and manufacture of opium
and its export
60. Sanctioning of cinematograph films for
exhibition
61. Industrial disputes con cerning Union
em ployees
62. National Library, the Indian Museum,
the Imperial War Museum, the Victoria
Memorial and the Indian War Memorial.
and any other like institution of national
importance
63. Benaras Hindu University, the Aligarh
Muslim University and the Delhi
Un iversity; any other institution of
national importance
64. Scientific or technical education institutions of national importance
65. Union agencies and institutions for training, research or detection of crime
66. Standards in institutions for higher education or research and scientific and techni cal institutions

709

67. Ancient and historical monuments and
records, and archaeological sites and
remains of national importance
68. The Survey of India, the Geological,
Botanical, Zoological and Anthropological Surveys of lndja; Meteorological
organisations
69. Census
70. Union Public Services; An·India Services;
Union Public Service Commission
71. Union pensions
72. Elections to Parliament, the legislatures
of states and the offices of President and
Vice·President; the Election Commission
73. Salaries and allowances of members and
presiding officers of Parliament
74. Powers, privileges and immunities of each
House of Parliament and of the members
and the committees of each House
75. Emoluments and service conditions of
the President, governors, the ministers
for the Union and th e Comptrol1er and
Auditor General
76. Audit of the accounts of the Union and
of the states
77. Organisation,jurisdiction and powers of
the Supreme Court
78. Organisation of the high courts
79. Extension of the jurisdiction of a high
court to any union territory
80. Extension of the powers and jurisdiction
of m embers of a poli ce force belonging
to any state to any area outside that state
81. Inter-state migration; inter-state quarantine
82. TIIXes on income other than agricultural
income
83. Duties of customs including export duties
84. Duties of excise on the following goods
manufactured or produced in India,
namely:(a) petroleum crude
(b) high speed diesel
(c) motor spirit (commonly known as
petrol)
(d) natural gas
(e) aviation turbine fuel; and
(f) tobacco and tobacco products
85. Corporation tax

t

710

,r/f

Indian Polity

86. Taxes on the capital value of the assets
(exclusive of agTicultura lland) of individuals and companies; taxes on the
capital of companies
87. Estate duty in respect of property other
than agricultural land
88. Duties in respect of succession to property other than agricultural land
89. Terminal taxes on goods or passengers,
carried by railway, sea or air; taxes on
railway fares and freights
90 . Thxes other than stamp duties on transactions in stock exchanges and futures
markets
91. Rates of stamp duty in respect of bills of
exchange, cheques, promissory notes,
bills of lading, letters of credit, policies
of insurance, transfcr of shares, debentures, proxies and receipts
92, (Omitted)
92A. 'nIxes on the sale or purchase of goods
other than newspapers, where such sa le
or purchase takes place in the course of
inter-state trade or commerce
92B. Tdxes on the consignment of goods in the
course of inter-state trade or commerce
92c' (Omitted)
93 . Offences against laws with respect to any
of the matters in this list
94. Inquiries, surveys and statistics for the
purpose of any of the matters in this
li st
95. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts
(except the Supreme Court) with
respect to any of the matters in this
list; admira lty jurisdiction
96. Fees in respect of any of the matters in
this list, but not including fees taken
in any court
97. Any other matter not enumerated in
List II or List III including any tax not
mentioned in either of those lists

t STATE LIST (LIST-II)
1. Public order
2. Police
3. Officers and servants of the high court

"

4. Prisons, reformatories, borstal institutions and other such institutions
5. Local government
6. Public health and sanitation
7. Pi lgrimages, other than pilgrimages to
places outside Indi a
8. Intoxicating liquors
9. Relief of the disabled and unemployable
10. Burials and burial grounds
IL (Omitted)
12. Libraries, museums and other similar
institutions; ancient and historical monuments and records other than those of
national importance
13. Communications, that is, roads, br idges,
ferries and other means of communication not specified in List I
14 . Agriculture, including agricu ltural education and research
15. Preservation of stock and prevention of
animal diseases
16. Pounds and the prevention of cattle
trespass
17. Water, that is, water supplies, ir rigation
and canals, drainage and embankments,
water storage and water power
18. Land, that is, right in or over land, laud
tenures and the coll ection of rents
19, (Omitted)
20 , (Omitted)
21 . Fisheries
22 . Courts of wards
23. Regulation of mines and mineral
development
24. Industries
25. Gas and gas-works
26. Trade and commerce within the state
27. Production, supply and distribution of goods
28. Markets and fairs
29, (Omitted)
30 . Money-lending and money-lenders; relief
of agricultural indebtedness
31. lnns and inn-keepers
32. Corporation, other than those specified in
List I, and universities; unincorporated
trading, literacy, Scientific, religious
and other societies and associa t ions;
co-operative societies

Subjects o(Union, State and Concurrent Uses

,

•

33. Theaters and dramatic performances;
cinemas; sports, entertainments and
amusements
34. Betting and gambling
35. Works, lands and buildings of the state
36. (Omitted)
37. Elections to the legislature of the state
38. Salaries and allowances of members and
presiding officers of the legislature of
the state
39. Powers, privileges and immunities of the
legislature of the state and of the mem·
bers and the committees thereof
40. Salaries and allowances of ministers for
the state
41. States public services; State Public Service
Commission
42. State pensions
43. Public debt of the state
44. Treasure trove
45. Land revenue, including maintenance of
land records
46. 'Taxes on agricultural income
47. Duties in respect of succession to agricul·
tural land
48. Estate duty in respect of agricultural land
49. Thxes on lands and buildings
50. Thxes on mineral rights
51. Duties of excise on alcoholic liquors for
human consumption; opium, Indian
hemp and other narcotic drugs and nar·
coties, but not including medicinal and
toilet preparations containing alcohol
52. (Omitted)
53. TIIXes on the consumption or sale of
e[ectricity
54. Taxes on the sale of petroleum crude, high
speed diesel , motor spirit (commonly
known as petrol), natural gas, aviation
turbine fuel and alcoholic liquor for
human consumption, but not including
sale in the course of inter·state trade or
commerce or sale in the course of inter·
national trade or commerce of such goods
55. (Omitted)
56. Thxes on goods and passengers carried by
road or on inland waterways
57. Taxes on vehicles

711

58. Taxes on animals and boats
59. Thlls
60. Thxes on professions, trades, callings and
employments
61. Capitation taxes
62. TInes on entertainments and amuse·
ments to the extent levied and collected
by a Panchayat or a Municipality or a
Regional Councilor a District Council
63. Rates of stamp duty in respect of docu·
ments other than those specified in List I
64. Offences against laws with respect to any
of the matters in this list
65. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts,
except the Supreme Court, with respect
to any of the matters in this list
66. Fees in respect of any of the matters in
this Jist, but not induding fees taken in
any court

~ CONCURRENT LIST (LIST-III)
1. Criminal Law, induding all matters
included in the Indian Penal Code
2. Criminal procedure, including all mat·
ters included in the Code of Criminal
Procedure
3. Preventive detention for reasons can·
nected with the security of a state, the
maintenance of public order, or the
maintenance of supplies and services
essential to the community
4. Removal from one state to another state
of prisoners and accused persons
5. Marriage and divorce; infants and
minors; adoption; wills, intestacy and
succession; joint family and partition
6. 1tansfer of property other than agricultural
land; registration of deeds and documents
7. Contracts
8. Actionable wrongs
9. Bankruptcy and insolvency
10. Trust and Trustees
11 . Administrators·general and official
trustees
11A. Administration of justice; constitution
and organisation of a.11 ,courts; except
. .
the Supreme Court and the high cO,u rts
"

,. ~ ,

712

(! Indian Pality

12. Evidence and oaths; recogni tio n of laws,
public a cts and records, and judicial
proceedings
13. Civ il procedure, including all matters
included in the Code of Civ il Procedure
14. Co ntempt of court, but not including
co ntempt of the Supreme Court
15. Vagran cy; nomadic and mi gra tory tribes
] 6. Lunacy an d mental deficiency
] 7. Prevention ofcrue!ty to animals
17 A. Forests
17B. Protection ofw- ild animals and birds
18. Adu lteration of foodstuffs a nd other
goods
19. Drugs and poisons
20. Eco nomi c and soc ial planning
20A. Popu lation control and famil y planning
21. Commercia l and industrial monopolies,
co mbin es and tru sts
22. Trade union s; indu stri al and labour
disputes
23. Social security and socia l in surance;
e mployment and unemp loyment
24. Welfare of labou r incl udin g conditions
of work, provident funds, employers'
l iability, workmen's compensation,
invalidity and old age pensio n s and
maternity benefits
25 . Education, including technicctl education,
medica l education a nd universities
26. Lega l, medical and other professions
27. Relief and rehabilitation of persons
28. Charitab le in stitutio ns, religiolls endowments and religious institutions
29. Infectious or contagious diseases or pests
affecting men, animals or plants
30. Vita l st..1 ti stics in cludi ng registrat ion of
births and deaths

31. Ports ot her than major ports
32. Shipp in g and navigation on inland
wate rways
33. Thade and com merce in , and the production, supply and di stribution of,
foodstuffs, including ed ibl e oil seeds
and oils; ca ttle fodder; raw cotton , and
cotton seeds; and raw jute
33A . Weights and measures except establishment of standards
34. Price co ntrol
35. Mechanica lly prope lled vehicles including the principles on which taxes on
such vehicles are to be levied
36. Factories
37. Boilers
38. Electri c ity
39. Newspapers, books and printing presses
40. Archaeological sites and rema ins ot he r
than those of natio nal importan ce
41. Evacuee property (including agricu ltural
land)
42. Acquisition and re qui si tioning of
property
43. Recovery in a state of claims in respect
of taxes and other public de mands
44 . Stamp duties othe r than duties or fees
co ll ected by mean s of judicial stamps,
but not including rates of stam p duty
45. In quiries and sl:<.ltistics for the purposes
of a ny of the matters specified in List
II or List III
46. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts,
except the Supreme Co urt, with respect
to any of the matters in thi s list
47. Fees in respect of any of the matters in
thi s li st, but not incl ud ing fees taken
in any cou rt

•

•

III
he Thble of Precedence is related to the
rank and order of the officia ls of
the Union and State Governments. But,
the order in this Thble is meant for state and
ceremonial occassions and has no application
in the day·to-day business of Government. The
present notification on this subject was issued
on 26 July, 1979. This notification superseded
all the previous notifications and was also
a mended many times. The updated version
of the Thble, containing all the amendments
made therein so far, is given below:
1. President
2. Vice·President
3. Prime Minister
4 . Governors of states within their respective
states
5. Former Presidents
SA. Deputy Prime Minister
6. Chief Justice of India
Speaker of Lok Sabha
7. Cabinet Ministers of the Union
Chief Ministers of States within their
respective States
Vice-Chairperson, NITI Aayog
Former Prime Ministers
Leaders of Opposition in Rajya Sabha and
Lok Sabha
? A. Holders of Bharat Ratna decoration
8. Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary and High Commissioners of
Commonwealth countries accredited to
India
Chief Ministers of States outside their
respective States
Governors of States outside their respective States

T

Table of
Precedence

9. Judges of Supreme Court
9A . Chairperson, Union Public Service
Commission
Chief Election Commissioner
Comptroller & Auditor General of India
10. Deputy Chairman, Rajya Sabha
Deputy Chief Ministers of States
Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha
Members of the NITI Aayog
Ministers of State of the Union (and
any other Minister in the Ministry of
Defence for defence matters)
11 . Attorney General of India
Cabinet Secretary
Lieutenant Governors within their respective Union Territories
12. Chiefs of Staff holding the rank of fuB
General or equivalent rank
13. Envoys Extraordinary and Ministers
Plenipotentiary accredited to India
14. Chairmen and Speakers of State Legislatures within their respective States
Chief Justices of High Courts within their
respective jurisdictions
15. Cabinet Ministers in States within their
respective States
Chief Ministers of Union Territories and
Chief Executive Councillor, Delhi within
their respective Union Territories
Deputy Ministers of the Union
16. Officiating Chiefs of Staff holding the rank
of Lieutenant General or equivalent rank
17. Chairman, Central Administrative
Tribunal
Chairman, Minorities Commission
Chairperson, National Commission for
Scheduled Castes

714

P

Indian Polity

Chairpe rso n , Nat iona l Co mmission for
Schedul ed Tr ibes
Chie f Justices of High Co urts outside their
respecti ve jurisdiction s
Puisne Judges of Hi gh Courts within their
respecti ve j urisdi ct ions
18. Cab in et Ministers in States outside their
respec tive States
Cha inne n a nd Spea kers of State Legislatures outs ide their respective States
Chairman, Mono pol ies and Restri ctive
Trad e Pract ices Co mmi ss ion
Deputy Cha innen and Deputy Speakers of
State Legislatures with in the ir respective
States
Ministers of State in States with in their
resp ective States
Mi nistersof Union Thrritoriesa nd Executive
Coun cilors, Delhi, within their respective
Union Th rritori es
Spea ke rs of Legis lat ive Asse mbli es in
Un io n Territories and Cha ir m a n of
Delhi Metropo li tan Coun c il within their
respective Uni on Territories
19. Ch ief Com mi ssioners of Union 'Te rritori es
not havi ng Co uncils of Mi ni ste rs, wHhi n
the ir res pective Union Territories
De pu ty Ministers in States within their
respect ive States
Deputy Speakers of Legislative Assemb li es
in Uni o n Thrrito ries a nd Deputy Chair
man of Metro pol ita n Co un c il , De lhi ,
withi n the ir respect ive Union Territories
20. Deputy Chairm e n and Deputy Speakers of
Sta te Leg islatures, outs id e th e ir respec·
tive States
Ministers of Sta te in States outs ide the ir
respective States
Puisne Judges of High Courts outside
their respect ive jurisdi ctions
21. Me mbers of Parliame nt
22. Dep uty Min isters i n States outs id e t he ir
respective States
23. Army Co mm a n ders/ Vi ce-Chief of the
Anny StaH' or equi va le nt in oth er sen 'ices
Chi ef Sec retari es to Sta te Gove rnm e nts
within their respecti ve States
Commiss io ne r for Lin guistic Minorities
4

Co mmi ss ione r fo r Schedul ed Castes and
Schedul ed Tribes
Me mbers, Mi nor ities Commiss ion
Members, Natio n a l Co mmi ss io n for
Sc hedu led Castes
Membe rs, Nat io nal Co mmi ss ion for
Sched ul ed Tribes
Officers of the ra nk of full Gene ra l or
equivalen t rank
Sec reta ri es to the Govern me nt of lndi a
(i ncluding officers holdin g thi s office
ex-offic io)
Sec reta ry, Min o ri ties Co mmi ss ion
Sec reta ry, Schedul ed Castes Commi ss ion
Secretary, Schedul ed Tribes Commission
Sec retary to the President
Secreta ry to t he Vice-Pres id en t
Sec reta ry to th e Pr im e Minister
Secre tary, Rajya Sa bha / Lok Sabha
So li c ito r Gen e ra l
Vice-Cha irm a n, Ce ntra l Admi n istrative
Tribuna l
24. Officers of the rank of Lieutena nt Gen e ral
or equivale nt ra nk
25. Additional Secretaries to the Governm ent
of India
Addition a l Sol icitor Ge n e ral
Advocate Ge neral s of States
Cha irman, Thriff Co mmi ss ion
Charge d ' Affa irs and Acting H ig h
Commissioners a pi ed and a d interim
Chi e f Mini ste rs of Union Territories a nd
Chi ef Execut ive Co un ci llor, Delhi , outside their respective Un ion Territories
Chi ef Sec retar ies of State Gove rnm ents
o utside t hei r respecti ve States
Deputy Co mptroll e r a nd Auditor Genera l
De puty Spea kers of Legislat ive Assemblies
in Uni on Territo ri es a nd De put y
Chaimla n , Delhi Metropolitan Coun cil,
ou ts ide their respective Uni on Territories
Directo r, Cen tra l Burea u of ln vestigatio n
Director Ge nera l, Borcler Security Force
Director Gen e ral , Ce ntra l Rese rve Pol ice
Directo r, In tellige nce Bu rea u
Lieu te n a n t Gove rnors o utside the ir
respect ive Union Te r ritories
Members, Central J\dmin istrativeTribunal

Tobie o(Precedence

Members, Monopolies and Restrictive
Trade Practices Commission
Members, Union Public SelVice Commission
Ministers of Union Territories and
Executive Councillors, Delhi, outside
their respective Union Thrritories
Principal Staff Officers of the Armed
Forces of the rank of Major General or
equivalen t rank

21 715

Speakers of Legislative Assemblies in
Union Territories and Chairman of
Delhi Metropolitan Council, outside
their respective Union Thrritories
26. Joint Secretaries to the Government of
India and officers of equivalent rank.
Officers of the rank of Major-General or
equivalent rank

,

APPENDI
.,

Amendment Number

IV

Constitutional
Amendments
at a Glance

Amended Provisions of the Constitution

and Year
First Amendment
Act. 1951

1. Empowered the state to make specia l provisions for the advancement of socially and
economically backward classes.
2. Provided for the saving of laws providing for acquisition of estates. etc.
3. Added Ninth Schedule to protect the land reform and other laws included in it from
the judicial review.
4 . Added three more grounds of res trictions on freedom of speech and expression, viz.,
public order, friendly relations with foreign states and incitement to an offence. Also,
made the restrictions 'reasonable' and thus, justiciable in nature.
5. Provided that state trading and nationalisation of any trade or business by the state
is not to be invalid on the ground of violation of the right to trade or business.

Second Amendment
Act, 1952

Readjusted the scale of representation in the lok Sabha by providing that one member

Third Amendment
Act. 195 4

Empowered the Parliament to control the production . supply and distribution of the
foodstuffs. ca ttle fodder, raw cotton, cotton seed and ra w jute in the public interest.

Fourth Amendment
Act, 1955

Fifth Amendment
Act. 1955

could represent even more than 7,50,000 persons.

1. Made the scale of compensation given in lieu of compulsory acquisition of private
property beyond the scrutiny of courts.
2. Authorised the state to nationalise any trade.
3. Included some more Acts in the Ninth Schedule.
4. Extended the scope of Article 31A {saving of laws).
Empowered the President to fix the time·limit for the state legislatures to express
their views on the proposed Central legislation affecting the areas, boundaries and
names of the states.

Sixth Amendment
Act, 1956
Seventh Amendment
Act, 1956

Eighth Amendment
Act, 1960

Included a new subject in the Union list i.e .. taxes on the sale and purchase of goods in the
course of inter-state trade and commerce and restricted the state's power in this regard.
1. Abolished the existing classificaHon of states into four categories i.e., Part A, Part B,
Pari C and Part D states, and re organise d them into 14 states and 6 union territories.
2. Extended the jurisdiction of high court s to union territories.
3. Provided for the establishment of a common high court for two or more states.
4. Provided for the appointment of additional and acting judges of th e high court.
Extended the reservation of seats for the SCs and 5Ts, and special representation for
the Anglo-Indians in the lok Sabha and the state legislative assemblies for a period
of ten years (I.e., up to 1970).

Ninth Amendment
Act, 1960

Facilitated the cession of Indian territory of Berubari Union {located in West Bengal)
to Pakistan as provided in the Indo· Pakistan Agreement (1 95 8).

Constitutionol Amendments ot 0 Glonce

~ 717

Am(>ndm(>nt Number
and Y(>ar

Am(>nd(>d ProvISIons of th(> ConstItution

Tenth Amendment Act.
1961

Incorporated Dadra and Nagar Haveli'in the Indian Union.

Eleventh Amendment
Act, 1961

1. Changed the procedure of election of the vice·President by providing for an electoral
college instead of a joint meeting of the two Houses of Parliament.
2. Provided that the election of the President or vice·President cannot be challenged on
the ground of any vacancy In the appropriate electoral college.

Twelfth Amendment
Act, 1962

Incorporated Goa, Daman and Diu in the Indian Union.

Thirteenth Amendment
Act, 1962

Gave the status of a state to Nagaland and made special provisions for it.

Fourteenth Amendment
Act. 1962

1. Incorporated Puducherry in the Indian Union.
2. Provided for the creation of legislatures and council of ministers for the Union
Territories of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Trlpura, Goa, Daman and Diu, and
Puducherry.

Fifteenth Amendment
Ad , 1963

1. Enabled the high courts to issue writs to any person or authority even outside its
territorial jurisdiction if the cause of action arise within its territorial limits.
2. Increased the retirement age of high court judges from 60 to 62 years.
3. Provided for appointment of retired judges of the high courts as acting judges of the
same court.
4. Provided for compensatory allowance to judges who are transferred from one high
court to another.
5. Enabled the retired judge of a high court to act as adhoc judge of the Supreme Court.
6. Provided for the procedure for determining the age of the Supreme Court and high
court judges.

Sixteenth Amendment
Act, 1963

1. Empowered the state to impose further restriction on the rights to freedom of speech

Seventeenth
Amendment Act, 1964

1. Prohibited the acquisition of land under personal cultivation unless the market value of
the land Is paid as compensation.
2. included 44 more Acts in the Ninth Schedule.

F '

...

1
•

,

•

OK

-~.

l

----

and expression, to assemble peaceably and to form associations in the interests of
sovereignty and integrity of India.
2. Included sovereignty and integrity in the forms of oaths or affirmations to be sub·
scribed by contestants to the legislatures, members of the legislatures, ministers,
Judges and CAG of India.

.

r----~--

-- ----~-~-_____i

Eighteegth Amendment
Act, 1966

Made it clear that the power of Parlia.ment to form a new state also Includes a power
to form a new state or union territory by uniting It part of a state or a union territory to
another state or union territory.

Nineteenth Amendment
Ad, 1966

Abolished the system of Election Tribunals and vested the power to hear election petitions
In the High Courts.

Twentieth Amendment
Ad, 196&

certain appointments of district judges in the UP which wer;d"eclared
the Supreme Court.

Twenty-First
Amendment Act, 1967

Included sind hi as the 15th language in the Eight Schedule.

validate~

~Oid b; - l
.

J

..

----- --~--~ -~~--

Twenty·Sec.ond
Amendment Act. 1969

Facilitated the creation of a new autonomous State of Megha laya within the State of
Assam.
(Contd.)

718 ,~ Indian Polity
Amendment Number
and Year

Amended ProvIsIons of the ConstItutIon

Twenty-Third
Amendment Act, 1969

Extended the reservation of seats for the SCs and STs, and special representation for Ihe
Anglo-Indians in the Lok 5abha and the state legislative assemblies for a fu rther period of
ten years (i.e., up to 1980).

Twenty-Fourth
Amendment Act. 1971

1. Affirmed the power of Parliament to amend any part of the ConstItutIon ff1cItIdIng 6iRdamental rights.
2. Made It compulsory for the President to give his assent to a ConstItutIOuI A"rnerMtnent
Bill.

Twenty-Fifth
Amendment Act, 197 1

1. Curtailed the fundamental right to property.
2. Provided that any law made to give effect to the Directive Principles ccn talned in
Article 39 (b) or (c) cannot be challenged on the ground of violation of the rights guaranteed by Articles 14, 19 and 31.

Twenty-Sixth
Amendment Act, 19 71

Abolished the privy purses and privileges of the former rulers of prfncely.states.

Twenty-Seventh
Amendment. 1971

1. Empowered the administrators of certain union territories to promulgate ordinances.
2. Made certain special provisions for new Union Territories of Arunachal Pradesh .and
Mizoram.
3. Authorised the Parliament to create the legislative assembly and the council of m inisters for the new state of Manipur.

Twenty·Elghth
Amendment Act. 1972

Abolished the special privileges of ICS officers and empowered the Parliament to determine their service conditions.

Twenty·Nlnth
Amendment Act. 1972

Jncluded two Kerala Acts on land reforms in the Ninth Schedule.

Thirtieth Amendment
Act. 1972

ctvtt C4Ses

Did away with the provision which allowed appeal to the Supreme COurt In
Involving an amount of ,(20.000, and provided Instead that an appeat can be. ~ fn. 1t1e"
Supreme Court only If the case Involves a substantial question of law.

Thirty-First Amendment
Act, 1972

Increased the number of Lok Sabha seats from 525 to 54 5.

Thirty-Second
Amendment Act, 1973

Made special provisions 10 satisfy the aspirations of the people of the- Telengana: regfon In
Andhra Pradesh.

Thirty·Third
Amendment Act, 1974

Provided that the resignation of the members of Parliament and the state Jegis·ature3
may be accepted by the Speaker/Chairman only if he is satisfied that the resignation ks
voluntary or genuine.

Thirty-Fourth
Amendment Act. 1974

Included twenty more land tenure and land reforms acts of various states In ~ Ninth
Schedule.

Thirty-Fifth Amendment
Act, 1974

Terminated the protectorate status of Sikkim and conferred on it the status of an associate
state of the Indian Union. The Tenth Schedule was added laying down the terms and cOfIditions of association of Sikkim with the Jndian Union.

Thlrty·Sixth
Amendment Act, 1975

Mad e Sikklm a full-fledged State of the Indian Union and omitted the Tenth

Thirty·Seventh
Amendment Act, 1975

Provided legislative assembly and council of ministers for the Union Territory of ArUIl..ichal
Pradesh.

s4.dwe..

Constitutional Amendments at a Glance
Atnen:lmert Number

'tt

719

Amended ProvIsions of the Constitution

,llld Y€' ,H

Tiiirty.9gh\ll
An'iendD1ent Ad. 1975

Thirty-Ninth
Amend.llent Act. 1975

1. Placed the disputes relating to the President, Vice-President, Prime Minister and
Speaker beyond the scope of the judiciary. They are to be decided by such authority
as may be determined by the Parliament.
2. Included certain Central acts in the Ninth Schedule.

Fo~ Amendment
Act, 1916

1, Empowered the Parliament to specify from time to time the limits of the terrttorial

Fort~F l rst Amendment

waters, the continental shelf, the exclusive economic zone (EEZ) and the maritime
zones of India.
2. Included 64 more Central and state laws, mostly relating to land reforms. in the Ninth
Schedule.

Act, 1976

Raised the retirement age of members of State Public Service Commission and Joint
Public Service Commission from 60 to 62.

For\y'$econd
Amef1dmontAtt. 1976

2. Added Fundamental Duties by the citizens (new Part rv Al.

(The ~sHoR1>re·

hens,!& amend·
maM made 50 tar

_of_

to the-Constttutton;

I

, _ Made the deciaraNon of emergency by the President non·justlciable.
2. Made the promulgation of ordinances by the President. Governors and administrators
of union territortes non·justtclable_
3. Empowered the President to declare different proclamations of national emergency
on different grounds simultaneously.

It Is kr10wn as 'Mint-..

constriuUon'; tt gave

effect to ttle recom-

SlnPCommmH.)

.

1. Added three new words (I.e., socialist, secular and Integrity) In the Preamble.

3. Made the President bound by the advise of the cabinet.
4. PrOVided for administrative tribunals and tribunals for other matters (Added Part XIV A).
5. Froze the seats in the lok Sabha and state legislative assemblies on the basis of
1971 census till 2001 .
6. Made the constitutional amendments beyond Judicial scrutiny.
7. Curtailed the power of judicial review and writ jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and
high courts.
8. Raised the tenure of l<* Sabha and state legislative assemblies from 5 to 6 years.
9. Provided that the laws made for the Implementation of Directive PrinCiples cannot be
declared Invalid by the courts on the ground of violation of some Fundamental Rights.
10. Empowered the Parilament to make laws to deal with antl·national activities and such
laws are to take precedence over Fundamental Rights.
11 . Added three new Directive Principles viz .. equal justice and free-legal ald. partiCipation
of workers In the management of Industries and protection of environment, forests
and wild life.
12. Facilitated the prOClamation of naUonal emergency In a part of terrttory of India.
13. Extended the one-time duration of the President's rule in a state from 6 months
to one year.
14. Empowered the Centre to deploy its armed forces in any state to deal with a grave
situation of law and order.
15. Shifted five subjects from the state list to the concurrent list, viz. educaUon, forests,
protection of wild animals and birds, weights and measures and administration of
Justice, constitution and organlsaUon of all courts except the Supreme Court and
the high courts.
16. Did away with the requirement of quorum In the Parliament and the state legislatures.
17. Empowered the Parliament to decide from time to time the rights and privileges of its
members and committees.
18. Provided for the creation of the AII·lndla Judicial Service.
19. Shortened the procedure for diSCiplinary action by taking away the right of a
civil servant to make representation at the second stage after the Inquiry
p.e., on the penalty proposed).
(Contd.)

720 j! Indian Poliry
Amendment Number
and Year

Amended Provisions of the Constitution

Forty-Third Amendment
Act, 1977 (Enacted by
the Janata Government
to nUllify some of the
distortions introduced by
the 42nd Amendment
Act of 1976)

1. Restored the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and the high courts in respec t
of Judicial review and issue of writs.

Forty-Fourth
Amendment Act. 1978
(Enacted by the Janata
Government mainly
to nullify some of
the other distortions
introduced by the 42nd
Amendment Act, 1976)

2. Deprived the Parliament of its special powers to make laws to deal with anti-national
activities.

1. Restored the original term of the Lok Sabha and the state legislative assemblies
(i.e., 5 years)."

2. Restored the provisions with regard to quorum in the Parliament and state legislatures.

3. Omitted the reference to the Brittsh House of Commons in the provisions pertaining
to the parliamentary privileges.

4. Gave constitutional protection to publication in newspaper of true reports of the
proceedings of the Parliament and the slate legislatures.

5. Empowered the President to Send back once the advice of cabinet for reconsideration.
But. the reconsidered advice is to be binding on the President.

6. Deleted the provision which made the satisfaction of the President, Governor and
administrators final in issuing ordinances.
7. Restored some of the powers of the Supreme Court and high courts.
8. Replaced the term 'internal disturbance' by 'armed rebellion' in respect of national
emergency.
9. Made the President to declare a national emergency only on the written
recommendation of the cabinet.
10. Made certain procedural safeguards with respect to national emergency and
PresIdent's rule.

11 . Deleted the right to property from the list of Fundamental Rights and made it only
a legal right.

12. Provided that the fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 20 and 2 1 cannot be
suspended during a national emergency.

13. Omitted the provisions which took away the power of the court to decide the
election disputes of the President, the Vice-President, the Prime Minister and the
Speaker of the Lok Sabha.
Forty-Fifth Amendment
Act, 19 80

Extended the reservation of seats for the SCs and STs and special representation for the
Anglo-Indians In the Lok Sabha and the state legislative assemblies for a further period
of ten years (Le., up to 1990).

Forty-Sixth Amend ment
Act, 1982

, . Enabled the states to plug loopholes In the laws and realise sales tax dues.
2. Brought about so me uniformity in tax rates on certain items.

Forty-Seventh
Amendment Act, 1984

Included 14 land reforms Acts of various states in the Ninth Schedule.

FOrty-Eighth
Amendment Act, 1984

Facilitated the extension of President's rule in Punjab beyond one year without meeting
the two special conditions for such extension.

Forty-Ninth Am endment
Act, 1984

Gave a constitutional sanctity to the Autonomous District Council in Tripura .

Fiftieth Am endment
Act. 1984

Empowered the Parliament to restrict the Fundamental Rights of persons employed
In Intelligence organisations and telecommunication systems set up fo r the armed
forces or Intelligence organisations.

Fift y-First Amendment
Act, 1984

Provided for reservation of seats in the Lok Sabha for STs in Meghalaya. Arunachal Pradesh,
Nagaland and Mizoram as weI! as in the Legislative Assemblies of Meghalaya and Nagaland.

Constitutional Amendments at a Glance

~ 721

Am Clld men t Num bcr
;:lnd '1'(,,11

Ame nde d PrOl/lSIOnS of the

Fifty-Second
Amendment Act. 198 5
{popularly knoWn as
Anti-Defection Law}

Provided for disqualification of mem
bers of Partiament and state legIS
latures on the
ground of defection and added
a new Tenth Schedule containing
the details
In this regard.

Fifty-Third Amendment
Act, 1986

Con stitu tion

Made speclal provisions in respect
of Mizoram and fixed the strength
of its Assembly
at a minimum of 40 members.

~alaries

Su~me C~urt and high court j~d~es ; denabled th; -1

FIfty.Fo-u-rth- - Amendment Act. 1986

Increased the
of the
Parliament to change them In futu
re by

Fifty-Fifth Amendment
Act, 198 6

Made special provislons,in respect
of Arunachal Pradesh and fixed
the strength of its
Assembly at a minimum of 30 mem
bers.

- - - - - - _..

an ordinary law.

_

...

~

Fifty-Sixth Amendment
Act ,198 7

"'i
Fixed the strength of the Goa
legislat

Fifty-Seventh
Amendment Act, 1987

Reserved seats for the STs In the
legi slative assemblies of the state
s of Arunachal
Pradesh. Meghalaya, Mi2:oram and
Nagaland.
PrOvlded"f~; an aUth~rlta~lve' text'"of the
Co·-n-st-It-u-t;-on~'n-h'-n--d-'-,.-n-g-u.-g-e~.n-d~g-.-v
e~th-.-..
legal sanctity to the Hindi version
of the Constitution.
1. Facilitated the extension of Pres
ident's Rule in Punjab up to thre
e years.
2. Provided for the declaration of
national emergency in Punjab on
the ground of internal
disturbance.

Fifty-Eighth
Amendment Act. 1987
Fifty-Ninth Amendment
Act, 1988

--

Sixtieth Amendment

Act,1988
Sixty-First Amendment
Act, 1989

't '

ive Assembly at a minimum of 30

members.

m. l

-_._-....,--

Increased the ceiling" of taxes on
professions. trades. callings and
employments from
t25 0 per annum to t2.5 00 per
annum.

Reduced the voting age from 21
years to 18 years for the lok Sab
ha and state legislative
assembly elections.

~. ~--~.

~.~-.~--

..

Extended the reservation of sea --~.---.---ts for the SCs and STs and special
representation for
the Anglo-Indians In the l<>'c Sab
ha and the state legislative asse
mblies for the further
_~~ period of ten year
s (i.e., up to 2000).

Sixty-Second
Amendment Act. 1989

Sixty-Third Amendment
Act, 1989

•

SIXty-Fo urth

Amendment Act, 199 0
Slxty-Fifth Amendment
Act, 1990

Repealed the changes Introduced
by the 59th Amendment Act of
1988 in relation
to Punjab. In other words, Punjab
was brought at par with the othe
r states in respect
of emergency provisions.

l

"fiUtt"

I..
:m
FaCilitated the extension of the
President's rule in Punjab upto a
total period of three
years end six months.

Sbrty-Slxth Amendment
Act, 199 0

Provided for the establishment of
a multi-member National Commiss
ion for SCs and
STs in the place of a Special Offi
cer for SCs and STs.
Included 55 more land reforms Acts
of var+Ous states in the Ninth Sch
edule.

Sixty-Seventh
Amendment Act, 199 0

Facilitated the extension of the Pres
ident's rule in Punjab up to a tota
l period of four years.

]

,----

---~-

Sixty-Eighth

Amendm~nt Ad. 1991

Sixty-Ninth Amendment
Act, 1991

-~--

----~
.--.~- -~---I
-Facilitated the extension of
the President's rule in Punjab
up to a total period
of five years.

Accorded a speCial status to the
Union Territory of Deihl by designi
ng it as the
National Capital Territory of Deih
l. The amendment also provided
for
the creation of a
70-member legislative assembly
and a 7-member council of minister
s for Delhi .
(Contd.)

722

fJ

Indian Polily

_OIh Amandment
Act, 1992

"':::::::~~~::~

ProvIdedTerrt1O<y
1ot1he_
Cap/lal
01 DeIhl and the Union
college for the election of the President

Seventy-First
Amendment Act, 1992
Sevenl}'-5econd

Amendment Act. 1992
Seventy.Thlrd
Amendment Act, 1992

Seventy-fourth
Amendment Act, 1992

Granted constitutional status and protection to the panchayati raj Institutions.
purpose, the Amendment has added a new Part-IX entitled as 'the panchayats' and a new
Eleventh Schedule containing 29 functional Items of the panchayals.

Gnlnled

p!OIedIon::~~t!:2;~

consUtu1Ional
statusaand
the Amendment
has added
new Pan IX-A
_

Schedule containing 18 funcIIonaIltsmS

Seventy-Fifth
Amendment Act. 1994

Provided for the establishment of rent tribunals for the adjudication of disputes with
respect to rent, Its regulation and control and tenancy issues including the rights, til le
and interest of landlords and tenants.

seventy-Sbcth
Amendment Act, 1994

Induded Ihe Tamil Nedu ReseMIIIon Act 011994 (WhIch ~ ,,~~:!
tion of selltS In educaUoneilnstttutJons and posts In Slate seMteI) Ir
to protect ~ from judicial review, In 1992, the SiIprame Coult ruled tItOI
tion should not exceed SO per cent.

seventy-Seventh
Amendment Act, 1995

Provided for reservation In promotions in government jobs for SCs and STs. This amendment nullified the Supreme Court ruling with regard to reservation in promotions.

5eventy-E/ghth
Amendment Act, 1995

1 _ 27 more land _Acts 01 _ _ 1n"'_H::::~=
total number of Acts In the Schedule _
to 282. BuI.

Seventy-Ninth
Amendment Act. 1999

Extended the reservatJon of seats for the SCs and STs and special representation for the
Anglo-Indians In the Lok Sabha and the state legislative assemblies for a further period of
ten years (I.e., up to 2010).

ElghUOIh Amendment
Act, 2000

Eighty-First Amendment

Act, 2000

""'Ie

0I~~::'~~:~~5~~

states.
Thts
enac:ted onsc/Ieme
the bests of the
Provided
lotwas
an 'aItemaItve
Commission which has recommended that out of the toCeI
Iaxes and duties. twenty...lne per cent should be dlstrtbuted among .... _ _ 'i
Empowered the state to consider the unfilled reserved vacancies of a year as a separate
class of vacancies to be filled up In any succeeding year or years. Such class of vacancies
are not to be combined with the vacancies of the year In which they are being filled up to
determine the ceiling of 50 per cent reservation on total number of vacancies of thai: year.
In brief, this amendment ended the 50 per cent ceiling on reservation in backlog vacandes

:s~r0I::~~~~!~'

Ing
ProvIded
marksfor
In any
meIcIng
examination
01 any provision
or lowering
In
matters of promoUon to the public services of the Centre and

0_

Eighty-Third
Amendment Act, 2000

Provided that no reservation In panchayats need be made for SCs In Arunachal Pradesh.
The total population of the state is tribal and there are no SCs.

E1ghty-fourth
Amendment Act, 2001

biles lot

Extonded the bon on .......- of ..... In the loI< Sabha
25 years (I.e. up to 20261 with the ..... oI>ledMt
Umltlng measures. In other words, the
ere to remain same till 2026. It also provided for the reecQustment and

Constitutional Amendments at a Glance
AmendmEnt Number

31. 723

Amended ProvISIOnS of the ConstitutIOn

i1rd Ye~r

Elghty·Fifth
Amendment Act, 2001

Provided for 'consequential seniority' in the case of promotion by virtue of rule of reservation for the government servants belonging to the SCs and STs with retrospective effect
from June 1995.

1. Made elementary education a fundamental right. The newly-added Article 21-A
\

~

;:: ",.•. ;.
I,

_

"

Eighty-Seventh
Amendment Act. 2003

declares that -the State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children
of the age of six to fourteen years in such manner as the State may determine".
2. Changed the subject matter of Article 45 in Directive Principles. It now reads-- The
State shall endeavour to provide early childhood care and education for all children
:.....' until they complete the age of six years".
., 3. Added a new fundamental duty under Article 51·A which reads-~It shall be the duty
'. ' of every citizen of India who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for education to his child or ward between the age of six and fourteen years".
Provided for the readjustment and rationalisation of territorial constituencies in the states
on the basis of the population figures of 2001 census and not 1991 census as provided
earlier by the 84th Amendment Act of 200 1.

Elghti-.EigDtll ". ,:"-.
Made a.provision for service tax. Taxes on services are levied by the Centre. But, their
Ameridinini;Act. 2003 . proceeds are collected as well as appropriated by both the Centre and the states In
"": .,:t
accordance with the principles formulated by parliament.

,

Eighty·Ninth
Amendment Act, 2003

Bifurcated the erstwhile combined National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes Into two separate bodies, namely, National Commission for Scheduled Castes and
National Commission for Scheduled Tribes. Both the Commissions consist of a Chairperson,
a Vice-Chairperson and three other members. They are appointed by the President.

Provided for maintaining the erstwhile representation of the Scheduled Tribes and non·

Sc~edUled Tribes in the Assam legislative assembly from the Bodoland Territorial Areas District.

Ninety..first
Amenctnent Act, 2003

1

I

Made the following provisions to limit the size of Council of Ministers, to debar defectors
from holding publiC offices, and to strengthen the anti-defection law:
1. The total number of ministers, Including the Prime Minister, In the Central Council of
Ministers shall not exceed 15% of the total strength of the Lok Sabha.
2. A member of either house of Parliament belonging to any political party who is disqualified
on the ground of defection shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a minister.
3. The total number of ministers, Including the Chief Minister, In the Council of Ministers
In a state shall not exceed 15% of the total strength of the legislative Assembly of that
state. But, the number of ministers, Including the Chief Minister, in a state shall not be
less than 12.
4. A member of either House of a state legislature belonging to any political party who is dis·
qualified on the ground of defection shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a minister. I
5. A member of either House of Parliament or either House of a State Legislature belonging to any political party who is disqualified on the ground of defection shall also be
disqualified to hold any remunerative political post. The expression "remunerative
political post" means (i) any office under the central government or a state government
where the salary or remuneration for such office is paid out of the public revenue of the
concerned government; or (ii) any office under a body, whether Incorporated or not, which
Is wholly or partially owned by the central government or a state government and the
salary or remuneration for such office is paid by such body, except where such salary or
remuneration paid Is compensatory in nature.
6. The provision of the Tenth Schedule (anti-defection law) pertaining to exemption from
disqualification in case of split by one-third members of legislature party has been
deleted. It means that the defectors have no more protection on grounds of splits.

(Conrd.)

724 {! Indian Polity
,
Amendment Number

Amended ProvISions of the ConstitutIOn

and Year

Ninety-Second
Amendment Act, 2003

Induded four more languages In the EJghth Schedule. They are Bodo, Dogrt (Dongtt).
Mathilli (Malthlll) and Santhali. With this. the total number of constitutionally recognised
languages Increased to 22.

Ninety-Third
Amendment Act. 2005

Empowered the state to ma ke special provisions for the socially and educationally backward classes or the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes In educational institutions
Including private educational Institutions (whether aided or una ided by the state). except
the minority educational Institutions.

Nlnety-Founh
Amendment Act. 2006

Freed Bihar from the obligation of having a tribal wetfare minister end extended the lame
provision to Jharkhand end Chhanlsgarh. This provision will now be appllcabte to the two
newly formed states and Madhya Pradesh and Odlsha. where It has already been In force.

Ninety-Fifth
Amendment Ac t, 2009

Extended the reservation of seats for the SCs and STs and special representation for the
Anglo-Ind ians in the Lok Sabha and the state legislative assemblies for a further period
of ten years i.e .. upto 2020.

Ninety-Sixth
Amendment Act. 2011

Substituted ~Odla · for · Orly8-. Consequently. the · Orfya- language In the Eighth SChedule
shall be pronounced as -Odla-.

Ninety-Seventh
Amendmen t Act, 20 11

Gave a constitutional status and protection to co-operative societies. In this context,
it made the following three changes in the constitution:
,. It made the right to form co-operative societies a fundamental right.
2. It included a new Directive Principle of State Policy on promotion of co-operative societies.
3, It added a new Part IX-S in the constitution which Is entitied as "The Co-operative Socjeties~.

Ninety-Eighth
Amendment Act. 2012

Provided for special provisions for the Hyderabad- kamataka region of the State of
Kamataka. The special provisions aim to establish an institutional mechanISm for equitable
allocation of funds to meet the development needs over the region. 8S well as to enhance
human resources and promote employment from the region by providing for local cadres
In service and reservation In educational and vocational training Instttutions.

Ninety-Ninth
Amendment Act, 20 14

Replaced the collegium system of appointing Judges to the Supreme Court and High
Courts with a new body called the National Judicial ApPOintments Commission (NJAC).
However, In 20 15. the Supreme Court has declared this amendment act as unconstitutional and void. Consequently, the earlier collegium system became operative again.

One Hundredth

Gave effect to the acquiring of certain terrttories by India and transfer of certain other territories to Bangladesh (through exchange of enclaves and retention of adverse possessions)
In pursuance of the Land 80undaty Agreement of 1974 and Its Protocol of 2011 . For this
purpose, this amendment act amended the provtslons relating to the territories of four states

Amendment Act. 2015

(Assam, West Bengal, Meghafaya and Trlpura) In the Arst Schedule of the Constitution.
One Hundred and First
Amendment Act. 20 16

Paved the way for the introduction of the goods and services tax (GST) regime in the country.
The GST shall replace a number of Indirect taxes being levied by the Union and the State
Government It is intented to remove cascading effect of taxes and provide for a common
national market for goods and services. The proposed Central and State GST will be levied on
all transactions involving supply of goods and services, except those which are kept out of the
purview of the GST. Accordingly. the amendment made the following provisions:
,. Conferred concurrent taxing powers upon the Parliament and the State Legislatures to
makes laws for levying GST on every transaction of supply of goods or services or both.
2. Dispensed the concept of ~declared goods of special importance~ under the constitution.
3. Provided for the levy of Integrated GST on Inter-state transactions of goods and services.
4. Provided for the establishment of a Goods and Services Tax Council by a Presidential
order.
5. Made the provision of compensation to the states for loss of revenue arising on
account of introduction of GST for a period of five years.
6. Substituted and ommltted certa in entries in the Union and State lists of the Seventh
Schedule.

Constitutional Amendments at a Glance

725

Amendment ~umber
and Year

Amended Provisions of the Constitution

One Hundred and
Second Amerclment
Act, 20 18

Conferred a constitutional status on the National Commission for Backward Classes
which was set-up in 1993 by an Act of the Parliament.
2. Relieved the National Commission for Scheduled Castes from its functions with regard
to the backward classes.
3. Empowered the Presiden t to specify the socially and educattonally backward classes in
relation to a state or union territory.

One Hundred and
Third Amendment Act,
,, 2019

1. Empowered the state to make any special provision for the advancement of any economically weaker sections of citizens.
2. Allowed the state to make a provision for the reservation of upto 10% of seats for such
sections in admission to educational institutions including private educational institu·
tions, whether aided or unaided by the slate, expect the minority educational institutions. This reservation of upto 10% would be in addition to the existing reservations.
3. Permitted the state to make a provision for the reservation of upto 10% of appointments or posts in favour of such sections. This reservation of uplo 10 % would be in
addition to the existing reservation.

One Hund(ed and
FO,urth A.ne(ldrritnt Act,

1: Extended the reservation of seats for the SCs and STs in the lok Sabha and the state

201a ' . '.

'

One Hundred and Fifth
Amendment Act 2021

legISlative assemblies for a further period of ten years I.e., upto 2030.
2. Olscontlnued the special representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the lok
Sabha and the state legislative assemblies by nomination.
1. Provided that the President may with respect to any state or union territory specify the
socially and educationally backward classes in the Central list for the purposes of the
central government.
2. Explained that the expression ~ Centra l list" means the List of socially and educationally
backward classes prepared and maintained by and for the central government.
3. Provided that every state or union territory may, by law, prepare and maintain, for its
own purposes, a list of socially and educationally backward classes, in which entries
may be different from the Central Ust.
4. Exempted the state governments from consulting the National Commission for
Backward Classes with regard to the preparation and maintenance of the list of socially
and educationally backward classes for their own purposes.

·

.

APPENDI

v

Constitutional
Amendments with
Reference to Articles

Amendment Act
(Year)

Article (Amended, Inserted,
Substituted & Omitted)

Schedule (Amended, Inserted,
Substituted & Omitted)

1st (1951)

Amended 15. 19, 85, 87, 174.
176, 341, 342. 372, 376

Inserted Ninth

Part (Amended. Inserted,
Substituted & Omitted)

Inserted 31A, 318
2nd (1952)

Amended 81

3rd (1954)
4th (1955)

Am ended Seventh
Amended 31, 31A

Amended Ninth

Substituted 305
5th (1955)

Amended 3

6th (1956)

Amended 269, 286

Amended Seventh

Amended 1, 49, 80, 131, 153.

Amended Second, Fifth.
Sixth, Seventh

7th (1956)

158, 168, 171, 216, 217, 222
Inserted 258A, 290A, 350A,
3508. 372A, 378A

Substituted First, Fourth

Amended VI heading
Substituted VII! heading
Omitted VII, IX

Substituted 81, 82. 170, 220.
224, 230, 231. 232, 239,
240,298, 371
Omitted 238, 242, 243, 259,
278, 306, 379 to 391
8th (t959)

Amended 334

9th (1960)

Amended First

10th (1961)

Amended 240

11th (1961)

Amended 66, 71

12th (1962)

Amended 240

13th (1962)

Inserted 371A

14th (1962)

Amended 81, 240

Amended First

Amended First
Substituted XXI heading
Amended First, Fourth

Inserted 239A
15th (1963)

Am ended 124, 128, 217, 222,
224, 226, 297, 311 , 316
Inse rt ed 224A

Am e nded Seventh

c

Constitutional Amendments with Reference to Articles
Amerdment Act

, 727

Article (Amended, Inserted,

Schedule (Amended, Insertee,

Part (Amended, Inserted,

(Yeaf ~
1 16~ (1963)

Substituted & Omitted)

Substituted & Omitted)

Substituted & Omitted)

Amended 19, 84, 173

Amended Third

17th (1964)

Amended 31A

Amended Ninth

r18;h

Amended 3

19th (t966)

Amended 324

[ 20th (1966i

Inserted 233A

(1966)

r21st
- _.(1967)
\ 22nd (1969)

Amended Eighth
Amended 275
Inserted 244A, 3718

23rd (1969}

Amended 330, 332, 333, 334

[ 24th (1971) .-

Amended 13, 368

25th (1971)

Amended 31

f

26th-i'9n)

1

Inserted 31C
Amended 366
Inserted 363A
Omitted 291, 362

27th (1971)

r28th (1972) - .

Amended 239A, 240
Inserted 239B, 371C
Inserted 312A
Omitted 314

29th (1972)

Amended Ninth

[ 30th (19721

Amended 133

31st (1973)

Amended 81, 330, 332

[ 32nd -(197 3)

Amended 371

Amended Seventh

Inserted 3710, 371E
33rd (1974)

[ 3-4t~ (1974) ..
35th (1974)

Amended 101, 190
Amended Ninth
Amended 80, 81

Inserted Tenth

Inserted 2A

36th 11975)

Amended 80, 81

Amended First, Fourth

Inserted 371F

Omitted Tenth

c

1

Omitted 2A

37th (1975)

[38th (~975)
39th (1975)

Amended 239A, 240
Amended 123, 213, 239B,
352,356,359,360
Amended 329

Amended Ninth

Inserted 329A
Substituted 71
(eontd.)

728 ;

Indian Pality

_ _ =39.
Amended 316

42nd (1976)

55. 74. 77. st. 82, 83, 100.
102. 105. n8. 145, 166. 170,
172. 189. 191, 194. 208. 217.
225. 227. 228. 311. 312. 330.

352,.353, .

--

, 357, 358. 359,

366. 368. 371F

Inserted 310. 32A. 39A,
43A, 48A, S1A, 131A, 139A,
144A, 226A, 228A, 2S7A,
323A, 3238
SubstRuted 103. Iso. 192. 226
43rd (1977)

Amended 145, 226, 228. 366
Omitted 310. 32A, 131A. 144A,

226A.228A

44th (1978)

=na.

Amended 19, 22, 30. 31A,
38. 74. 77. 83, 100, 102.

10\1.

Amended Ninth

123. 132. 133. 134.

139A, 150, 166, 172, 189. 191,
194. 208, 213, 217, 225, 22~
227, 239B, 329, 3S2, 3S6.
3S6. 359. 360, 37IF

_134A. 300A. 361A
_71.103.192

Omitted 31, 2S7A, 329A
45th (1980)

Amended 334

46th (1982)

_

269. 286. 366

47th (1984)

Amended Ninth

_3S6
49th (1984)

--

Amended 244

SIiIstItutecI 33
51st (1984)

Amended 330, 332

52nd (I98S)

_ 1 0 1 , 102. 190, 191

53rd (1986)

Inserted 371G

54th (1986)

Amended 125. 221

55th (198G)

Inserted 37t H

561/1 (1987)

Inserted3~

57th (1987)

Amended 332

58th 09 71

Inserted 394A

Amended Fifth, Sixth

__
_Tenth

Amended XXII

Constitutional Amendments with Reference to Artides
Amend ment Act
(Year)

A rticle (Amend ed, Inserte d,
Substit uted & Omlttf.- d)

59th (t988)

Amended 356

Schedu le (Am e nded, Inserte d,

Part (Amend ed klserted ,
Substit uted & OmllU e d)

Substit uted & Omitted )

-

-

Inserted 359A
60th 0988)

Amended 276

61st (1988)

Amended 326

62nd 0989)

Amended 334

63rd (1989)

Amended 356

729

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Omitted 359A

64th (1990)

Amended 356

65th (1990)

Amended 338

'66111(1990)

-

67th (1990)

Amended 356

68th (1991)

Amended 356

69th (1991)

Inserted 239M, 239AB

70th ~992)

Am~nded 54, 239AA

-

71st (1992)

-

-

-

Amended Ninth

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Amended Seventh

. 72nd (1992)

Amended 332

73rd (1992)

-

Amended 280

Inserted Eleventh

Inserted IX

Inserted Twelfth

Inserted IXA

-

Inserted 243, 243A to 243-0
74th 0992)

Amended 280
Inserted 243P to 243Z.
243ZA to 243ZG

75th (1993)

-

76th (1994)

77th (1995)

-

Amended 3238

Amended 16

781h (1995)
79th (1999)

Amended 334

80th POOO)

Amended 269

-

-

Amended Ninth

-

-

-

Amended Ninth

-

-

-

-

Substituted 270

.

Omitted 272
81st (2000)

Amended 16

82nd (2000)

Amended 335

83rd (2000)

Amended 243M

84111 (200~

Amended 55. 81, 82. 170,
330.33 2

, 85th (2001)

Amended 16

I

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

I

(Contd.)

730 ,(/ Indion Polity
Amendment Act
(Year)

Article (Amended. Inserted,
Substituted & Omitted)

86.h 12002)

Amended 51A

•
Schedule (Amended. Inserted.
Subst tuted & Omitted)

Part (Amended, Inserted.
Substituted & Omitted)

Inserted 21A
Substituted 45
87th (2003)

Amended 81, 82. 170, 330

88.h 12003)

Amended 270

Amended Seventh

Inserted 268A
89th (2003)

Amended 338
Inserted 338A

90th 12003)

Amended 332

915t (2003)

Amended 75, 164

Amended Ninth

Inserted 3618
Amended Eighth

92nd 12003)
93rd (2005)

Amended 15

94th (2006)

Amended 164

95th (2009)

Amended 334
Amended Eighth

96th 12011)
97th (2011)

Inserted iXB

Amended 19
Inserted 43B. 243ZH to 243ZT

98th 12012)

Inserted 371J

99th (2014)

Amended 124, 127. 128, 217,
222, 224, 224A, 231
Inserted 124A, 124B, 124C
Amended First

.00th 120.5)
101st (2016)

Amended 248, 249, 250,
268, 269. 270, 271, 286,

366,368
inserted 246A, 269A, 279A
Omitted 268A

102nd 12018)

Amended 338, 366
Inserted 338B, 342A

103rd 12019)

Amended 15, 16

100.h 12019)

Amended 334

1QSth (2021)

Amended 338B, 342A, 366

Amended Sixth, Seventh

V I Flag Code of India
here is univer sal affect ion and respec t
for, and loyalt y to, the nation al flag.
Yet, a perce ptible lack of aware ness
is often notice d, not only amon gst peopl e
but also in the organ isatio ns/ agenc ies of the
gover nmen t, with regard to laws, practi ces
and conve ntions that apply to the displa y of
the nation al flag. Apart from non-s tatuto ry
instru ctions issued by the Gover nmen t from
time to time, the displa y of the nation al flag
is gover ned by the provis ions of the Emble ms
and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act,
] 950 and the Prevention of Insults to National
Honou.r Act, 1971. The Flag Code of India,
2002, is an attem pt to bring togeth er all such
laws, conve ntions , practi ces and instru ctions
for the guida nce and benef it of all conce rned.
For the sake of conve nience , the Flag Code
of India, 2002, has been divide d into three
parts. Part I of the code conta ins a gener al
descri ption of the nation al flag. Part II of the
code is devote d to the display ofthe nation al
flag by memb ers of public , privat e organ isa·
tions, educa tiona l institu tions, etc. Part III of
the code relate s to displa y of the nation al flag
by Centr al and state gover nment s and their
organ isatio ns and agenc ies.
The Flag Code of India, 2002, took effect
from Janua ry 26, 2002 and supers eded the
'":Flag Code· India" as it existe d earlier .

T

j

PART I-GENERAL DESCRIPTION
OFT HE NATIONAL FLAG

).1 The nation al flag shall be a tri--colour panel
made up of three rectan gular panels or
sub-pa nels of equal widths. The colour

of the top panel shall be India saffro n
(kesari) and that of the bottom panel
shall be India green. The middl e panel
shall be white, bearin g at its centre the
design of Ashoka Chakra in navy blue
colour with 24 equall y spaced spokes. The
Ashoka Chakra shall prefer ably be screen
printe d or otherw ise printe d or stenci led
or suitab ly embro idered and shall be
compl etely visible on both sides of the
flag in the centre of the white panel.
1.2 The nation al flag shall be made of hand
spun and hand woven or mach ine
made, cotton / polye ster/w ool/ silk/ khadi
buntin g l .
1.3 The nation al flag shaH be rectan gular
in shape . The ratio of the length to the

heigh t (width) of the flag shall be 3,2.

1.4 The standa rd sizes of the nation al flag

shall be as follows:
Flag Size No. Dime nsion s in mm

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

6300 x 4200
3600 x 2400
2700 x 1800
1800 x 1200
1350 x 900
900 x 600
450 x 300
225 x 150
150 x 100

IParagraph 1.2 was amend ed vide order dated 30th
December, 2021. Before this amend ment, it stood
as foUows:
"The nation al flag of India shall be made of
hand spun and hand woven wool/c otton/ silk!
khadi buntin g-.

732

P

Indian Polity

1.5 An appropr ia te size should be chosen for
di splay. The flags of 450 x 300 mm size
are intended for ai.rcrafts on VVIP fli ghts,
225 x 150 mm size for motor-cars and
150 x 100 mm size for tables.

PART II-HOISTING/ DISPLAY /
USE OF NATIONAL FLAG BY
MEMBERS OF PUBLIC, PRIVATE
O RGANISATIONS, EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUT IONS, ETC.
Section I
2.1 The re sha ll be no restri ct ion on the di spl ay of the national flag by members of
general public, pri va te organisations,
educational institutions, etc., exce pt
to the exte nt prov ided in th e Emb lems
alUI Names (Preventio n of Improper Use)
Act , 1950 and the Prevention of In su lts to
Natiorw l Hon our Act, ]97] and any other
law enacted on the subject. Keeping in
view the provis ion s of the aforementioned Acts
(i) The flag shall not be used for co mmercia l purposes in viola tion of
the Emblems and Names (PreVCl1tiOIi
of Improper Use) Act, 1950
(ii) The flag sh a ll not be dipped in
sa lute to any perso n o r thing
(iii) The fl ag sha1l not be flown at
half-ma st exce pt on occasions
on whi c h th e flag is flown at
half-mast on publi c buildings in
a ccordan ce wi th the in stru ction s
issued by the Gm'ermnen t
(iv) The fl ag sha11 not be used as a
drapery in any form whatsoever,
including pri vate funerals
(v) The fl ag shall not be used as a
por tion of costum e or uniform
of any description nor sha ll it
be embroidered or printed upon
cushions, handkerchi efs, n a pkin s
or any dress materia l
(vi) Lettering of any kind sha ll no t be
put upon t he flag

(vii) The fla g shall not be used as a
receptacle for receiving, delivering,
holding or carrying a nything:
Except that t h e re sha]] be no
objection to keeping flower peta ls in side th e fla g before it is
unfurled as part of ce lebrations
o n sp ec ial occas io n s and on
nat iona l days like th e Repub li c
Day and th e Independ e nce Day;
(viii) When used on occasions like unveHing of a statue, the flag sha ll be
displayed distinctly a nd separa tely
and it shall not be used as a covering for the statue or monument
(ix) The flag sha ll not be used to cover
a speake r' s desk nor shall it be
draped over a sp eaker's platform
(x) The fla g sha H not be intentionally
a llowed to touch t he ground or the
floor or trail in water
(xi) T he flag shall not be draped over
the hood , top, sides or back of a
vehicl e, tra in , boat or an aircraft
(xii) Th e fla g sha ll not be used as a
covering for a building
(xiij) The fla g sha ll not be intentionally
displayed with its saffron portion
downwards
2.2 A member of publi c, a private organisat ion or an educationa'i in stituti o n
may h oist/ di splay th e nationa l fla g on
all days a nd occasion s, ce remo ni a l or
otherwise. Co nsistent with th e dign ity
a nd hon our of the nat io nal flag
(i) Whenever th e national fl ag is
displayed, it should occupy the
position of hon our and should
be d isti nctl y placed
(li) A damaged or di sheve lled flag
shou ld not be disp layed
(iii) The flag should not be flown from
a s in gle m asth ea d si mul taneously with a ny other fla g or flags
(lv) The fl ag should not be flown on
any vehi cle except in accordance
with t he prov is io ns co nta in ed in
Section IX of Part III of this code

.

Flog Codeo( Indio

(v) When the flag is displayed on a
speaker's platform, it should be
flown on the speaker's right·as he
faces the audience or flat against
the wall, above and behind the
speaker
(vi) When the flag is displayed flat and
horizontal on a wall, the saffron
band should be upper most and
when displayed vertically, the
saffron band shall
be on the right
.
..
.
with reference to · the flag (i.e.,
left to the person facing the flag)
(vii) Tb the extent possible, the flag
should conform to the specifications prescribed in Part I of this
code
(viii) No other flag or bunting should be
placed higher than or above or
side by side with the national flag;
nor should any object including
flowers or garlands or emblem be
placed on or above the flag-mast
from which the flag is flown
(ix) The flag should not be used as a
festoon, rosette or bunting.or in
any ~ther man~er for decor~tio·n
(x) The flag made of paper may be
waved by public on occasions
of important national, cultural
and sports events. However, such
paper flags should not be discarded or thrown on the ground
after the event. As far as possible,
they should be disposed of in private consistent with the dignity
of the flag
(xi) Where the fJag is displayed in
open or displayed on the house
of a member of public, it·may be
flown day and night 2•
·~l··,

,--------

2Clause (xi) was amended vide order dated 20th July,
2022. Before this amendment, it stood as follows:
"WheJe the flag displayed in open, it should, as
far as -possible, be flown from sunrise to sunset,
irrespective of weather conditions".

~ 733

(xii) The flag should not be displayed or
fastened in any manner as may
damage it
(xiii) When the flag is jn a damaged
or soiled condition, it shall be
destroyed as a whole in private,
preferably by burning or by any
other method consistent with the
dignity of the flag.

Section II
2.3 The national flag may be hoisted in
educational institutions (schools, colleges, sports camps, scout camps, etc.)
to inspire respect for the flag. A model
set of instructions for guidance is given
here.
(i) The school will assemble in open
square formation with pupils
forming the three sides and the
flag-staff at the centre of the
fourth side. The headmaster,
the pupil leader and the person
unfurling the flag (if other than
the headmaster) will stand three
paces behind the flag-staff.
(ii) The pupils will fall according
to classes and in squads of ten
(or other number according to
strength). These squads will be
arranged one behind the other.
The pupil leader of the class will
stand to the right of the first row
of his class and the form master
will stand three paces behind
the last row of his class, towards
the middle. The classes will be
., arrahged along the·square in the
order of seniority with the senior
most class at the right end.
(iii) The distance between each .row
should be at least one pace
(30 inches) and the "space between
fonn and fonn should be the same.
(iv) When each form or class is
ready, the class leader will step
forward and salute the selected
school pupil leader. As soon as all
the forms are ready, the school
l

Flag Code of Indio

3.8 When the flag is displayed from a staff
projecting horizontally or at an angle
fro m a windowsill, balcony, or fron t
of a building, the saffron band shall
be at the farther end of the staff.
3.9 When the flag is displayed flat and
hori zontal on a wall, the saffron
ba nd shall be upper m ost and wh en
displayed vertically, the saffron band
sh all be to the r ight with referen ce
to the flag, i.e., it may be to the left
of a person facing it.
3.10 Whe n th e fl ag is di splayed o n a
speaker's platfo rm , it sh all be fl own
on a staff on the speaker's right as he
faces th e audien ce or flat against the
wall above and behind the speaker.
3. U When used o n occasio ns like th e
unveiling of a statue, the flag sh all be
displ ayed distinctly and separately.
3. 12 When the flag is displayed alon e on
a motor car, it shall be flo.wn fro m a
staff, which should be affixed firml y
either on the middl e fron t of the bon·
net or to the front righ t side of the car.
3. 13 When the flag is ca rried in a procession or a parade, it shall be eith er
o n th e m arching right, i.e., the fl ag's
own right, or if there is a lin e of
oth er flags, in fron t of the cen tre of
th e lin e.

Secti_ IV: Incorrect Display
3.14 A damaged or dish eveled flag shall not
be displayed.
3 .15 The flag shall not be dipped in sal ute
to an y person or th in g.
3.16 No oth er flag or bunting shall be
p lace d higher th a n o r above or,
except as herein after provided, side
by side with th e n ation al flag; n or
shall an y object in cluding flowe rs or
garla nds or embl em be placed on or
above th e flag-mast from which th e
flag is flown.
J. 17 The flag shall not be used as a festoon,
rosette or bunting or in an y oth er
;1
m ann er for deco ration .

~ 735

3.18 The flag shaH not be used to cover a
spea ker's desk no r shall it be draped
over a speaker's platform .
3. 19 Th e flag shall n ot be di splayed with
the saffron portio n downwa rds.
3.20 The flag shall not be allowed to touch
th e ground or the floor or trail in
water.
3 .21 The fla g sha ll n ot be di spl ayed or
faste n ed in a ny m a nn er as may
dam age it.

Section V: Misuse
3.22 The flag shall n ot be used as a drapery
in any fonn wh atsoever except in
State/military/Central para-mil ita ry
fo rces funerals hereinafter provided.
3.23 Th e flag shaH n ot be draped over the
hood, top, sides or back of a vehicle,
trai n or boat.
3.24 The fl ag shall n ot be used or stored
in such a m ann er as may dam age
or so il it.
3.25 When the flag is in a dam aged or
so iled co ndition , it shall not be cast
aside or disrespectfull y disposed of
bu t shall be destroyed as a whole in
private, preferabl y by burning o r by
any oth er meth od consistent with
the digni ty of the fl ag.
3.26 The flag shall not be used as a coverin g for a building.
3.27 The flag shall n ot be used as a pa r·
tion of a costum e or uniform of any
desc ription. It shall not be embroidered or p r in ted upon cush io ns,
handkerchiefs, n apk ins or b oxes.
3.28 Lettering of any kind sh all not be put
upon th e flag.
3.29 Th e flag shall n ot be used in a ny
form of adverti se ment nor sh all a n
advertising sign be fasten ed to th e
pole from which the flag is fl own.
3.30 The flag sh all n ot be used as a receptacle for rece ivi ng, delivering , h old·
ing or carrying anything:
Provided that there shall be n o objection to keeping flower petals inside

736 ,~ Indian Polity
the Flag before it is unfurled, as part of
celebrations on specia l occasions a nd
on National Days like the Republic
Day and the Ind e penden ce Da y.

Section VI: Salute
3.31 During the ce remo ny of hoisting or
lowering the nag or when the flag is
passing in a parade or in a review,
all persons prese nt should fa ce the
flag and stand at attention. Those
present in uniform should render
the appropriate salute. When the
fl ag is in a moving col umn, persons
prese nt will stand at attention or
salute as the flag passes them. A dignitary may take the sa lute without
a head dress.

Section VII : Display with Flags of other
Nations and of United Nations
3 .32 When djsplayed in a straight lin e with
flags of other countries, the national
flag sha ll be on the extreme right, i.e.,
if an observer were to stand in the
center of the row of the flags facing
the audience, the nationa l flag should
be to his extreme right.
3.33 Flags of foreign cou ntri es shall proceed as from th e nationa l nag in
alphabetical order on the basis of
English versions of the names of
the countries concerned. It would be
permiSSible in such a case to begi n
and also to end the row of flags with
the n ational flag and also to include
the national nag in the normal
co untry-wise alphabetical order. The
nationa l flag shall be hoisted first
and lowered last.
3.34 In case fla gs are to be Amvn in an open
circle, i.e., in an arc or a semi-ci rcle,
the sa me procedure shall be adopted
as is indicated in the preceding
clause of this section. In case flags
are to be flown i.n a closed, i.e., com·
plete circle, the national flag shall

mark the beg inning of the circle a nd
the flags of other co untries should
proceed in a clockwise manner until
the last flag is pla ced next to the
national flag. It is not necessary to
use sepa rate nationa l flags to mark
the beginning and the end of the
circle of flags. The national flag shall
also be included in its alphabetical
order in such a closed circle.
3.35 When the national flag is di sp layed
aga inst a wall with another flag from
crossed staffs, the national nag shall
be o n the right, i.e., the flag's own
right, and its staff shall be in front
of the staff of the other flag.
3.36 When the United Nation's flag is
flown along with the national nag,
it ca n be di splayed on either side
of the national flag. The general
pra ctice is to fly the national flag on
the extreme right with referen ce to
the direction which it is facing (i.e.,
extreme left of an observer fa cing
the ma sts fl y ing the flags) .
3.37 When the nationa l flag is fl own
with flags of other countri es, the
flag ma sts shall be of equa l s ize.
International usage forbids the display of the flag of one nation above
that of another nation in tim e of
peace.
3.38 The national fl ag shall not be flown
from a s ingle mast-head s imultane·
ously with any other flag or flags.
The re sha ll be separate mast-heads
ror different flags.

Section VIII : Display over Public
Buildings/ Official Residences
3.39 No rmall y the national flag should
be flown only on important public
buildings such as high courts, sec·
retariats, comm iss io ners' offices,
co llectorates, ja i Is and offices of the
di st ri ct boards, mun icipa li ties and
zilla pariS/lads a nd departmental!
public sector undertak ings.

1

Flag Code of India

I

j

3.40 In fro ntier areas, the national flag
may be flown on the border customs
posts, check posts, ou t posts and at
other sp ecia l places where fl ying
of the flag has special signifi ca nce.
In addition, it may be flown on the
cam p sites of border patrols.
3.41 The national flag should b e flown
on the offi cia l residences of the
President, Vice-President, governors
and lieutenant governors when they
are at headquarters and on the building in which they stay during the ir
visits to places outside th e headquarters. The flag flown on the official
residence should, however, be brought
down as soon as the dignitary leaves
the headqu arters a nd it sh ould be
re-hoisted on that building as he
enters the main gate of the building
on return to the h eadquarters. When
the .dignitary is on a visit to a place
outside the headquarters, the fla g
should be hoisted on the building in
which he stays as he enters the mai n
gate of that building and it should be
brought down as soon as he leaves
that place. However, the fla g should
be flown from sun-rise to sun-set on
such official res ide n ces, irrespective of whether the digni tary is at
headquarters or n ot on the Republic
Day, Independence Day, Mahatama
Ga ndhi 's Birthday, Nat ional Week
(6th to 13th April, in the memory
of martyrs of Jalianwala Bagh), any
other particular d ay of n a tional
rejoicing as may be specified by the
Government of India or, in the case
of a state, on the anniversary of formation of that state.
3.42 When the President, the Vice-President
or the Prime Minister visits an institution, the national flag may be flown by
the institution as a mark of respect.
3.43 On the occasions ofthe visit to India
by foreign dignitaries, n a mely,
President, Vi ce-Pres ident, Emperor/
King or Heir Prin ce and the Prime

~ 737

Minister, the national flag may be
flown along with the flag of the
fore ign country concerned in accordance with the rules contained in
Section VII by such private institution s as a re according reception to
the visiting fo reign dignitaries and
on such public buildings as the fore ign dignitaries inte nd to visit on
the day of visit to ·the institution.

Section IX: Display on Motor Cars
3.44 The pri vilege of fl yi ng the n ation al
fl ag on motor cars is limited to the
(1) President
(2) Vice-President
(3) Governors and Lieutenant
Governors
(4) H ea ds of Indi a n mi ss ions /
posts abroad in the countries to
which they are accredited
(5) Prime Minister and other Cabinet
Ministers
Mini sters of State and Deputy
Ministers of the Union
Chief Minister and other Cabinet
Ministers of a State or Union
Territory
Ministers of State and Deputy
Ministers of a State or Union
Te rritory
(6) Speaker of th e Lok Sabha
Deputy Chairm an of the Rajya
Sabha
Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha
Chairmen of Legislative Councils
in States
Speakers of Legislative Assemblies
in States and Union Thrritories
Deputy Chairmen of Legislative
Counci ls in States
Deputy Speakers of Legisfative
Assemblies in States and Union
Thrritories
(7) Chief Justice of India
Judges of Supreme Co urt
Ch ief Justice of High Courts
Judges of High Courts

738

(I Indian Palily

3.45 The dignitaries mentioned in Clauses
(5) to (7) of Paragraph 3.44 may
fly the nation al flag on their cars,
whenever they consi der it necessa ry
or advisable.
3.46 When a foreign digni tary travels in
a car provided by government, the
national flag will be flown on t he
right side of the ca r and the flag of
the foreign co untry wiJ1 be flown on
the left side of the ca r.

Section X: Display on Trains/ Aircrafts
3.47 When the Preside n t travels by s pc~
cial train within the country, the
national fla g should be flown from
the driver 's cab on the side facing
the p latform of the sta tion from
where the train departs. The flag
s hould be flown on ly when the
spec ial train is statio nary or when
co ming into the station where it is
going to halt.
3.48 The national flag will be flown on the
a ircraft carrying the President, the
Vice-President or the Prime Minister
on a visit to a foreig n country.
Alongside the national flag, the flag
of the country visited should a lso be
flown but, when the aircraft lands in
countries enrol/te, the national flags
of the countries touc hed wou ld be
flown in stea d, as a gesture of courtesy and goodwill.
3.49 When the President goes all tour
within India, the national flag will
be displayed on the sid e by which
t he President will embark the aircraft or disembark from it.

Section XI : Half-masting
3.50 In th e event of the death of the fo llowing dignitaries, th e national flag
shall be half-masted at the places
indi cated against each on the day of
the death of the dignitary.

Dignitary
( 1) (a) President
)
(b) Vice-President
(c) Prim e Minister

Place or Places
Throughout
India

(2) (a) Speake r of the Lok Sabha}
.
(b) Chi ef Justice of India
De lhi
( 3) Union Cab in et

Minister

Delhi a nd
Sta te Capita ls

(4) Minister of State or Deputy

Minister of the Union

(5) (a) Gove rnor

(b) Lt. Governor
(c) Chief Minister
of a State
(d) Chief Minister of a
Union territory

(6) Cab in et Minister

in a Sta te

Delhi

Throughout the
State or Union
Thrritory
co n cern ed
Cap ital of the
State co ncerned

3.51 If th e intimation of the dea t h of any
dignitary is received in the afte rnoon, the nag shall be ha lf-ma sted
on the fo ll owing day a lso at th e
pla ce or places indicated above,
provided the funeral has not taken
pla ce be for e sun-ri se on that day.
3 .52 On the day of t he funeral of a dignitary mention ed above, the flag sha ll
be ha lf-masted at the pla ce where the
fun era l takes place.
3.53 IfState mourning is to be observed on
the death of any dignitary, the Oag
shall be half-masted t hroughout the
pe riod of the mourning t hroughout
India in the case of the Union dignitaries and throughout the state or
union territory concerned in the case
of a state or union territory dignitary.
3.54 Half-mast ing of the flag and, where
necessary, observance of state
mourning on the death of foreign
dig-nitari es will be governed by specia l instru ct ions which wi ll issue
from the ministry of Home Affa irs
in individual cases.

1

Flog Codeaf Ind;o

1

3.55 Notwithstanding th e above provisions, in the event of a half-ma st
day cO inciding with the Republic
Day, Independen ce Day, Mahatma
Ga ndhi' s Birthday, National Week
(6th to 13th April, in the memory
of martyrs of Jalianwa la Bagh ), any
other particular day of n ati ona l
rejoicing as may be specified by the
Government of Ind ia or, in the case
of a state, o n the anniversary of form ation of that state, the flags sh all
n ot be flown at half-ma st except over
the building where the body of the
deceased is ly ing until such time it
h as been removed a nd that fl ag shall
be raised to th e full-mast position
after the body ha s been rem oved.
3.56 If mourning were to be observed in
a parade or procession where a flag
is carried, two strea m ers of bl ack
crepe shall be attach ed to the spear
head, allowing the streamers to fa l1
naturally. The use of bl ack crepe in
such a mann er sh a11 be only by an
order of the Governm ent.
3.57 When flown at half-mast, the flag shall
be hoisted to the peak for an instant,
then lowered to the half-mast position,
b ut before lowering the flag for the day.
it shall be raised again to the peak.
Note: By half-mast is meant hauling
down the flag to one half the distance

'tj, 739

between the top and the guy-line and
in the absence of the guy-li ne, half of
the staff.
3.58 On occasio ns of State/ military/
Central para-mili tary forces' funerals, the flag shall b e draped over
the bier o r coffin with the saffron
towards the head of th e bier or co ffin. The flag shall not be lo we red
into the grave or burnt in the py re.
3.59 In the event of death of either the
Head of the State or Head of the
Governm ent of a foreign country,
the Indi a n mi ss io n accredited to
that country may fly the national
flag at half-mast even if that event
falls on Republic Day, Independen ce
Day, Mahatma Ga ndhi's Birthday,
National Week (6th to 13th Apri l, in
th e m emory of m artyrs of Jalianwala
Bagh) or any other particular day of
natiqn al rejoicing as may be specified by the Governm ent of India. In
the event of death of any other dignitary of that country, the n ational flag
should n ot be flown at half-mast by
th e missions except when the local
practice or protocol (which should
be ascertained from the Dean of the
Diplom atic Co rps, where necessary)
requi re that the national flag of a foreign mi ss ion in that country should
also be flo wn at half-mast.

APPENDI
.

VII

Presidents, VicePresidents, Prime
Ministers, etc.

t A. PRESIDENTS OF INDIA
Name

Tenure

1.

Dr. Rajendra Prasad

1950 - 1962

2.

Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan

1962 - 1967

3. Dr. Zakir Husain

1967 - 1969
(Died)

4.

Varahagiri Venkata Girl

1969 - 1969
(Acting)

5.
6.

Tenure

6.

Justice Mohammad
Hidayatullah

1979-1984

7.

R. Venkataraman

1984 - 1987

8.

Dr. Shanker Dayal Sharma

1987 - 1992

9.

K.R. Narayanan

1992-1997

10. Krishan Kant

1997 - 2002 ([tied)

11.

8hairon Singh Shekhawat

2002 - 2007

12.

Mohammed Hamid Ansari

2007-2012

Mohammed Hamid Ansari

2012 - 2017

Justice Mohammad
Hidayatullah

(Acting)

13.

Varahagiri Venkata Girl

1969 - 1974

14. Venkaiah Naidu

2017 - 2022

1974 - 1977 (Died)

15. Jagdeep Dhankhar

2022 - till date

7 . Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed
8.

1969 - 1969

Name

B.D. Jatti

1977 - 1977
(Acting)

9.

Neelam SanjiVa Reddy

1977 - 1982

10.

Giani Zai! Singh

1982 - 1987

11.

R. Venkataraman

1987 - 1992

12.

Dr. Shanker Dayal Sharma

1992 - 1997

13.

K.R. Narayanan

14.

Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam

~ C. PRIME MINISTERS OF INDIA
Name

Tenure

1.

Jawaharlal Nehru

1947 - 1964 (Died)

2.

Gulzari Lal Nanda

1964 - 1964 (Acting)

1997 - 2002

3.

Lal Bahadur Shastri

1964 - 1966 (Oleo)

2002 - 2007

4.

Gulzari La! Nanda

1966 - 1966 (Atting)

15. Smt. Pratibha Patil

2007 - 2012

5.

Indira Gandhi

1966- !977

16.

Pranab Mukherjee

20 12 - 20 17

6.

Morarji Desai

1977-1979

17. Ram Nath Kovind

2017-2022

7.

Charan Singh

1979-1980

18. o oupadi

2022 - till date

8.

Indira Gandhi

1980 - 1984 (Died)

9.

Rajiv Gandhi

1984-1989

t B. VICE-PRESIDENTS OF INDIA

10.

Vishwanath Pratap Singh

1989 - 1990

11.

Chandra Shekhar

1990 - 1991

"m

Name

Tenure

12.

p.v. Narasimha Rao

199 1 - 1996

1.

Dr. Sarvepalli
Radhakrishnan

1952 - 1962

13.

Atal Bihari Vajpayee

1996 - 1996
(For 16 Days)

2.

Or. Zakir Husain

1962 - 1967

14.

H.D. Deve Gowda

1996-1997

3.

Varahagiri Venkata Girl

1967 - 1969

15.

I.K. Gujral

1997 - 1998

4.

Gopal Swarup Pathak

1969 - 1974

16.

Atal Bihar! Vajpayee

1998 - 1999

1974 - 1979

17.

Atal Bihari Vajpayee

1999 - 2004

5.

B.D. Jatti

Presidents, Vice-Presidents, Prime Ministers, etc.

741

~ F. CHIEF JUSTICES OF INDIA

21.

Dr. Manmohan Singh

2009 - 2014

Narermra Modi

2014 - 2019
2019 -lill dale

Narendra Modi

~ D. DEPUTY PRIME MINISTERS

Name

Tenure

1. Harjlal J. Kania

1950 - 1951

2. M. PatanJali Sastri

195 1 - 1954

3.

M.C. Mahajan

1954-1954

4. B.t< . Mukherjee

1954 - 1956

5. S.R. Das

1956 - 1959

Tenure

6 . B.P. Sinha

1959 - 1964

1947 - 1950

7.

1964 - 1966

12
3.

Morarjt Desai

1967 - 1969

8. A.K.SarkaT

1966 - 1966

Charan Singh and Jagjivan Ram
Uointty)

1977 - 1979

9. K. Subba Rao

1966 - 1967

4.

1979 - 1980

10. K.N. Wanct'too

1967 - 1968

Y.s. o.an

5.

1989 - 1990

11 . M. Hidayatullah

1968 - 1970

Devi Lat

1990 - 1991

12. J.C. Shah

1970 - 1971

16 Devlla!
7. U::.. Advanl

13. S.M. Sikri ·

1971 - 1973

14. A.N. Ray

1973 - 1977

15. M.H. Beg

1977 - 1978

16. V.V. Chandract'tud

1978 - '985

17. P.N. Bt'tagwaU

1985 - 1986

' 8. R.S. Pathak

'986 - ' 989
1989 - 1989

f\ame

1. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel

2002 - 2004

~ E. SPEAKERS OF THE LOK SABHA
,
f'IIilme

1.

Ganes'l Vasudev Mavatankar

Tenure

1952 - 1956

p.e . Gajendragadkar

(Died)

'9. E.S. Venkalaramalah

2.

N. AAalthasayanam
Ayvangar

1956 - 1962

20. S. Mukherjee
21. Ranganath Mishra

' 989 - '990
1990 - 1991

3.

Hukam Singh

1962 - 1967

1991 - 199 1

4.

22. K.N. Singt't

Nee/a,. Sanjlva Reddy

1967 - 1969

23. M.H. Kania

1991 - 1992

(Resigned)

24. l.M. Sharma
25. M.N. Venkatachalaiah

'992 - 1993
1993 - 1994

26. A.M. At'tm8di

1994 - 1997

27. J.S. Verma

1997 - 1998

(Resigned)

28. M.M. Punct'thi

1998- 1998

1<'5. Hegde

1977 - 1980

29. A.S. Anand

1998 - 2001

9. Bal Ram Jakhar

1980 - 1989

30. S.P. Bt't8ruct'ta
31 . B.N. Klrpal

200' - 2002
2002 - 2002

[ 32. G.B. P8ttanaik

2002 - 2002

5.

Gurdiat Singh Dhillon

1969 - 1975
(Resigned)

6.

Ball Rallll Bhagat

1976 - 1977

7.

Neetam Sanjiva Reddy

1977 - 1977

8.

~ 10.

Rabl Ray

1989 - 1991

11.

Shlvraj V. Patlt

1991 - 1996

12.

P.A. Sangm.

1996 - 1998

13.

G.M.C. Balayogl

1998 - 2002

1 ,4. . ManohBr Gajanan Joshi

33. V.N. Khare

2002 - 2004

34. S. Rajendra Babu

2004 - 2004

(Died)

35. R.C. Lahoti

2004 - 2005

-

2002 - 2004

36. V.K. Sabt'tarwal

2005 - 2007

Somnalh -Chatterjee

2004 - 2009

37. K.G. Balakrishnan

2007 - 2010

Ms. Metra Kumar

2009 - 2014

38. S.H. Kapadia

2010 - 2012

i7.

Ms. Sumilra Mahajan

20 14 - 2019

39. Altamas Kabir

2012 - 2013

18.

Om Blrla

20 19 - tilt date

40. P. Sathasivam

20'3 - 20 ' 4

15.

i 16.

(Conrd.,

742

{I Indian Polity
Name

Tenure

R.M. Lodha

2014 - 2014

H.L. OaHu

2014 - 20 15

T.S. Thakur

2015- 20 17

J.S. Kheher

2017 - 20 17

45.

Dipak Misra

2017 - 20 18

46.

Ranjan Gogoi

47.

S.A. Bobde

48.

41 .
42.

t H. CHAIRMEN OF THE UPSC
Name

Tenure

1. Sir Ross Barker

1926 - 1932

2. Sir David Petrie

1932 - 1936

3. Sir Eyre Gorden

1937 - 1942

2018 - 2019

4. Sir F.W. Robertson

1942 - 1947

20 19 - 2021

5. H.K. Kripalani

1947 - 1949

NV. Ramanl l

2021 - 2022

6. R.N. Banerj ee

1949 - 1955

49.

U.U. Lalit

2022 - 2022

7. N. Govindarajan

1955 - 1955

50.

D.Y. Chandrachud

8. V.S. Hejmad i

1955 - 1961

9. B.N. Jha

1961 - 1967

10. K.R. Damle

1967 - 1971

".

R.C.S. Sarka r

197 1 - 1973

13.

Dr. M.l. Shahare

43.
44.

- iii die

G. CHIEF ELECTION
COMMISSIONERS OF INDIA
Name

Tenure

1.

Sukumar Sen

1950 - 1958

2.

K.V.K. Sundaram

1958 - 1967

3.

S.P. Sen Verma

1967 - 1972

4.

Dr. Nagendra Singh

1972 - 1973

5.

T. Swamlnathan

1973 - 1977

6.

S.l. Shakdhar

1977 - 1982

7.

R.K. Trivedi

1982 - 1985

8.

R.v.S. Peri Sastri

1986 - 1990

9.

Smt. V. S. Rama Devi

1990 - 1990

10.

T.N. Seshan

1990 - 1996

".

M.S. Gill

12.

12. Dr. A.R. Kidwai

1973 - 1979
1979 - 1985

14. H.K.l. Capoor

1985 - 1990

15. J.P. Gupta

1990 - 1992

16. Smt. R.M. Bllthew (Kharbu fi)

1992 - 1996

17.

1996 - 1996

S.J.S. Chhatwal

18. J.M. Qureshi

1996 - 1998

19. Lt. Gen. (Retd.) Surinde r Nath

1998 - 2002

20. P.C. Hota

2002 - 2003

2 1. Mata Prasad

2003 - 2005

22. Dr. S.R. Hashim

2005 - 2006

1996 - 2001

23. Gurbachan Jagal

2006 - 2007

J.M. l.yngdoh

2001 - 2004

24. Sublr Dutta

2007 - 2008

13.

T.S. Krishna Murthy

2004 - 2005

25. D.P. Agrawal

2008- 201 4

14.

B.B. Tandon

2005 - 2006

26. Smt. Raj"i Razdan

2014 - 2014

15.

N. Gopalaswamy

2006 - 2009

27. Deepak Gupta

20 14 - 2016

16.

Naveen Chawla

2009 - 2010

28. Alka Sirohl

2016 - 2017

17.

S.Y. Quraishi

2010- 2012

29.

20 17 - 2018

18.

V.S. Sampalh

2012 - 2015

30. Viney Mtttal

2018 - 2018

19.

H. S. Brahma

20 15-20 15

31. Arvlnd Saxena

20.

Nasim Zaidi

2015 - 2017

2018 - 20 18
(Acting)

21.

2017 - 20 18

32. Arvind Saxena

2018 - 2020

A.K. Jyotl

22.

2018 - 2018

33. Pradee p Kumar Joshl

2020 - 2022

Om Prakash Rawat

23.

Sunil Arora

2018- 2021

24.

Sushil Chandra

202 1 - 2022

25.

Rajlv Kumar

2022 - till date

David Sylemlieh

34. Manej Soni
35. Manoj Sonl

2022 - 2023
(Acting)
2023 - till
date

______________________________________~Pr~e~s~~e~n=~.~W~IC~~~re
~s~;d~e~n~=.~p~r;~m~e~M~m~"=te~~~.=e'=c.~~~o 743

j

I. COMPTROLLER AND AUDITORGENERALS OF INDIA

/

J. ATTORNEY - GENERALS
OF INDIA
Name

Tenure

M.e. Setalvad

1950 - 1963

2. C.K. Oaphtary

1963 - 1963

3. Niren De

1968 - 1977

4. S.v. Gupte

1977 - 1979

5. l.N. Sinha

1979 - 1983

6. K. Parasaran

1983 - 1989

7. Soli J. Sorabjee

1989 - 1990

1984 - 1990

8. G. Ramaswamy

1990 - 1992

e.G. Somiah

1990 - 1996

9. Milon K. Banerjee

1992 - 1996

V,K. Shunglu

1996 - 2002

Name

Tenure

1.

\/, Nerharl Rao

1948 - 1954

2.

A.K. Chanda

1954 - 1960

3. SH. A.K. Roy

1960-1966

o.

1966 - 1972

5. A. Bakst

1972 - 1978

6. Glan Prakash

1978 - 1984

7. T.N . Chaturvedi
8.

9.

5. Ranganathan

10. V.N. Kaul

2002 - 2008

11 . Vinod Rai

2008 - 2013

12. Shashi Kant Sharma

2013-2017

13. Raji... Mehrlshl

2017 - 2020

14. Girlsh Chandra Murmu

.

PI

2020 - till date

1.

110 Ashok K. Desai

11 . Soli J. 50rabjee

1998 - 2004

12. Mllon K. Banerjee

2004 - 2009

13. Goolam E. Vahanvati

2009-2014

114. Mukul Rohatgi

I

1996 - 1998

2014 - 2017

15. K.K. Venugopal

2017-2022

16. R. Venkataramani

2022 - till date

VIII
A. NATIONAL HUMAN
RIGHTS COMMISSION
Name

1. Justice Ranganath Misra

1993 - 1996

2. Justice M.N. VenkatachaUah

1996 - 1999

3. Justice J.S. Verma

1999 - 2003

4. Justice A.S. Anand

2003 - 2006

5. Justice Shlvaraj V. Patit

2006 - 2007
(Acting)

6. Justice S. Rajendra Babu

2007 - 2009

7. Justice Govind

2009 - 2010
(Acting)

Prasad Mathur

j

Tenure

,

Chairpersons
of the National
Commissions

Name

Tenure

7.

Maml a Sharma

2011 - 2014

8.

Lalltha Kumaramangalam

20 14 - 2017

9.

Rekha Sharma

201 7 - 2018
(Acting)

10. Rekha Sharma
11.

Rekha Sharma

20 18-202 1
202 1 - till date

C. NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR
PROTECTION OF CHILD RIGHTS
Name

Tenure

B. Justice K.G. Balakrishnan

20 10 - 2015

1. Dr. Shantha Sinha

200 7 - 20 10

9. Justice Cyrial Joseph

20 15- 2016
(Acting)

2.

20 10 - 20 13

10. Justice H.l. Danu

3. Kushal Singh

20 13 - 20 14

2016 - 2020

11 . Justice P.C. Pant

4.

Stutl Nataln Ka cker

2015 - 20 18

2021 - 2021
(Acting)

5.

Priyank Kanoongo

20 18-2021

12. Justice A.K. Mlshra

2021 - till date

B. NATIONAL COMMISSION
FOR WOMEN

Dr. Shantha Sinha

6. Priyank Kanoongo

2021 - till date

D. NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR
BACKWARD CLASSES

Name

Tenure

Name

Tenure

1.

Jayanti Patnaik

199 2 - 1995

1. Justice R.N. Prasad

19 93 - 1996

2.

Dr. V. Mohinl Girl

1995 - 1998

2. Justice Shyam Sunder

1997 - 2000

3. Vibha Parthasarathi

1999 - 2002

3. Justice B.L Yada ....

200 0 - 2002

4. Dr. Poornlma Advani

2002 - 2005

4 . Justice Ram Surat Singh

2002 - 2005

5. Dr. Girlja Vyas

2005 - 2008

5. Justice S. Ralnavel Pandlan

2006 - 2009

6. Dr. Gir~a V as

2008 - 201 1

6. Justice M.N. Rao

20 10- 2013

f

.

".
Chairpersons of the National Commissions

,
.'\Iame

2013 - 2016

It Or. Shagwan Lal Sahnl

20 19 - 2022

9. Hansraj Gangaram Ahir

2022 - till date

Name

I

1

I2

Justice Mohammad Sardar
Ali Khan

1993 - 1996

----:J

2004 - 2006

2 . Buta Singh

2007 - 2010

3. P.l. Punia

2010 - 20 13

4. P.L Punia

20 1 ~ =>~~__ ,
2017 - 2020
I

--

3. Justice Mohammed Shamim

2000 - 2003

4_ ;arlochan Singh

2003 - 2006

5. Mohammad Hamid Ansari

2006 - 2007

6

2007 - 2010

-

Mohammad 5hafi Qureshi

7. Wajahat Habibullah

I

I

7. Vijay Sampla

2014 - 20 17

9. Syed Ghayorul Hasan Rizvi

2017-2020

' C. Iqbal Singh Lalpura

2021 - 2022

Iqbal Singh l alpura

l

H: NATIONAL COMMISSION
FORSTs
Tenure

- 2007
._--_ .- - ---- -2004
-- ~-

2. Urmila Singh

2007 - 201 0

3. Rameshwar Oraon

2010-2013

4. Rameshwar Oraon

2013 - 2016
--,--_ .,

5. Nand Kumar Sai

2017-2020

.,

.!
11·1

,t

Tenure

1992 - 1995

2.

H. Hanumanthappa

1995 - 1998

3 . Dileep Singh Bhuria

1998 - 2002

4. Vijay Sonkar Shastri

2002 - 2004

(.'

1.

.

-

I

It

I

,, .

J

' .,

,"

.,

•

j".
t".

-, "
"

I,

-

---------6. Harsh Chouhan
202 1 - till date

E ERSTWHILE NATIO NAL"
r COMMISSION FOR SC~ ~
AND ST. (COMBINED) .
1. S.H. Ramdhan

J

I

1. Kunwar Singh

2022 - till date

Name

J

_

202' - 2022~
-2022
--- till date
I
,---,.-

6. Vijay Sampla

Name

2011 - 2014

8 . N aseem Ahmad

II.

I

,

1. SuraJ Shan

1996- 1 9~

Prof Tah ir Mohammad

745

Tenure

5. Ram Shankar Katheria
Tenure

"" :

t

. E. NATIONAL COMMISSION
FOR MINORITIES.
Name

•

G: NATIONAL COMMISSION
_ FORSCs

Tenure

7. Justice V. Eswaraiah

.

I....

•

,.

,

II.

.."

,,
,

•

"
r "

• I

In this Part...
Question Set I UPSC Questions on Indian
Polity (General StudiesPrelims 2013-2023)
Question Set II Practice Questions on
Indian Polity (General
Studies-Prelims)

Questlan Set III UPSC Questions on Indian
Polity (General StudlesMains 2013-2022)
Question Set IV Practice Questions on
Indian Polity (General
Studies-Mains)

UPSC Questions on Indian Polity
(General Studies-Prelims 2013-2023)

t 2013 TEST PAPER
1. Who among the following constitute the
National Development Council?
1. The Prime Minister
2. The Chairman, Finance Commission
3. Ministers of the Union Cabinet
4. Chief Ministers of the States
Se lect the correct answer using the codes

gi Yen below:
(a) 1, 2 and 3 only (b) 1, 3 and 4 only
(e) 2 and 4 only
(d) 1,2,3 and 4
2. Consider the following statements:
The Parliamentary Committee on Public
Accounts
1. consists of not more than 25 Members
of the Lok Sabha
2. scrutinizes appropriation and finance
accounts of the Government
3. examines the report of the Comptroller and Auditor Genera1 of India
Which of the statements given above is/are

correct?

(a) 1 only
(e) 3 on ly

(b) 2 and 3 only
(d) 1,2 and 3

3. In the context of India, which of the following principles is/ are implied institutionally in the parliamentary government?
1. Members of the Cabinet are Members
of the Parliament.
2. Ministers hold the office till they enjoy
confidence in the Parliament.
3. Cabinet is headed by the Head of the
State.
Select the correct answer using the codes
given below.
(a) 1 and 2 only (b) 3 on ly
(e) 2 and 3 only (d) 1,2 and 3
4 . Consider the following statements:
1. The Council of Ministers in the Centre
shall be collectively responsible to
the Parliament.
2. The Union Ministers shall hold the
office during the pleasure of the
President of India.
3. The Prime Minister shall communicate to the President about the proposals for legislation.
Which of the statements given above is/ are
correct?

UPSC Questions on Indion Polity (General SWdies-Prelims 2013-2023)

Ca) I only
(b) 2 and 3 only
Cc) 1 and 3 only Cd) 1,2 and 3
5. Consi der the foHowing statem ents:
1. Natio nal Devel opme nt Counc il is an
organ of the Plann ing Comm ission .
2. The Econo mic and Social Plann ing is
kept in the Co ncurrent List in the
Co n stituti on of India.
3. The Con stitution of India prescr ibes
that Panch ayats shoul d be assign ed
the task of prepa ration of plans for
econo mic develo pmen t and social
justic e.
Which of the statem ents given above is/ are
co rrect?
Ca) 1 only
(b) 2 and 3 only
Cc) 1 and 3 only Cd) 1,2 and 3
6. Con si der the follow ing statem ents:
1. The Ch a irm a n and the Depu ty
Chair man of the Rajya Sabha are
not the members of that House.
2. While the nomi nated m embe rs of
the two House s of the Parlia ment
have no voting right in the presidentia l electi on , they have the right
to vote in the electi on of the Vice
Presid ent.
Which of the statem en ts given above is/ are
co rrect?
Ca) 1 only
(b) 2 only
Cc) Both 1 and 2 Cd) Ne ither 1 nor 2
7. With refere nce to Nat ional Legal Services Autho rity, co n si der the follow ing
state ments :
1. Its object ive is to provid e free and
com pete nt lega l serv ices to th e
weake r sectio ns of the societ y on the
basis of equal oppor tunity.
2. It issues guide lines for the State Legal
Servic es Autho rities to imple ment
the legal progra mm es and sch emes
throug hout the count ry.
Which of the statem en ts given above is/ are
correc t?
Ca) 1 only
(b) 2 only
Cc) Both 1 and 2 Cd) Nei ther I n or 2
8. Unde r the Sched uled Tribes and Other
Tradit ional Forest Dwell ers (Reco gnitio n of
Forest Rights) Act, 2006, who sha11 be the

747

autho rity to initiat e the proce ss for determinin g the nature and extent of indivi dual
or comm unity forest rights or both?
(a) State Forest Depar tment
(b) Distri ct Collec tor/ Deput y Comm is.
sione r
(e) ThhsHdar/ Block Devel opm ent
Office r/ Mand aI Reven ue Office r
Cd) Gram Sabha
9. 'Eco nomic Justic e' as one of the objectives
of the Indian Const itutio n has been provided in
(a) the Pream ble and th e Funda menta l
Rights
(b) the Pream ble and the Direc tive Principles of Sta te Policy
(e) the Funda menta l Rights and the Directive Princi ples of State Policy
Cd) None of the above
10. Accor ding to the Const itutio n of India,
which of the follow ing are funda menta l
for the gover nance of the cou ntry?
Ca) Funda menta l Rights
(b) Funda menta l Dutie s
(c) Direct ive Princi ples of State Policy
Cd) Funda menta l Rights and Funda menta l
Duties
n. What will follow if a Mone y Bill is substanti ally amen ded by the Rajya Sabha?
Ca) The 10k Sabha may still procee d with
the Bill, accep ting or not accep ting the
. recom menda tions of the Rajya Sabha
(b) The Lok Sabh a can not co n sider the
Bill furthe r
Cc) The Lok Sabha may send th e Bill to
the Rajya Sabha for recon sidera tion
(d) The President may caH a joint sitting
for passi ng the Bill
12. Which one of the foHowing sta temen ts is
correc t?
(a) In India, the same perso n ca nnot be
appoi nted as Gove rnor for two or
more States at the sa m e time
(b) The Judge s of the High Court of the
States in India are appoi nted by
the Gover nor of the State just as the
Judge s of the Supre me Co urt are
a ppo inted by the Presid ent

I

I
I
I

I

748

(! Indian Polity

(e) No procedure has been la id down in
the Constitution of Indi a for th e
remova l of a Gove rnor from his/ her
post
(d) In the case ofa Union Thrritory having
a leg islative setup , the Chi ef Minister
is appointed by the Lt. Gove rn or on
the basis of majority support
13. With refe rence to Indi a n Hi story, th e
Members of th e Constituent Assembly
from the Provi nces were
(a) directly elected by the people of those
Provinces
(b) nom in ated by the Ind ia n Natio nal
Co ngress a nd the Muslim League
(c) elected by the Provin c ial Leg islat ive
Assem blies
(d) se lected by the Government for their
expertise in co n stitutiona l matters
14. Co nsid er the fo ll owing statements:
1. An amendme nt to the Co nstitution
of Indi a ca n be ini t iated by an introduction of a bi ll in the Lok Sab ha
onl y.
2. If suc h an amendment seeks to make
changes in the federa l character of the
Constitution, th e amendment also
req uires to be ratified by the legislature of all the States of Indi a.
Wh ich of the statements given above is/ are
co rrect?
Ca) 1 only
(b) 2 only
Cc) Both I and 2 Cd) Neither 1 nor 2
15. Co nsider the following stateme nts:
Attorney Genera l of In dia can
1. take part in the proceedings of the Lok
Sabha
2. be a member of a co mm ittee of the
Lok Sabha
3. speak in the Lok Sabha
4. vote in the Lok Sab ha
Which of the statements given above is/ are
correct?
Ca) ) on ly
(b) 2 and 4 only
Cc) 1,2 a nd 3
Cd) 1 a nd 3 on ly
16. Whi ch of th e following bodies docs not /
do not find mention in the Co nstitu tio n ?
1. Nat io nal Development Co un ci l

2. Pla nning Com mi ssion
3. Zo nal Cou ncils
Select the co rrect answer using the codes
given below.
Ca) 1 a nd 2 o nl y ( b) 2 only
Cc) I and 3 on ly Cd) 1,2 and 3
17. The Parliament ca n make any law for
whole or any part of India for implement·
ing in te rna tio nal treaties
(a) with the co nse nt of all the States
(b) with the consent of the majo rity of
States
(e) with the consent of the States
co ncerned
(d) without the co n se nt of any State
18. The Governm ent enacted the Panchayat
Exte nsion to Sch edu led Areas (PESA) Act
in 1996. Which one of th e following is not
identifi ed as its objective?
(a) 1b provide se lf·governance
(b) 1b recognize traditional rights
(e) 10 create autonomous regio ns in tribal
areas
(d) 1b free tribal people from exploita tio n

t 2014 TEST PAPER
l. Co nsider the following la nguages:
1. Gujarati
2. Kannada
3. Thlugu

Which of the above haslhave been declared
as 'Classical Language/ Languages' by the
Gove rnm ent?
Ca) 1 an d 2 only (b) 3 o nly
Cc) 2 an d 3 only Cd) 1, 2 and 3
2 . Whi ch one of the fo11owing is th e largest
Co mm ittee of the Parliament?
(a) The Co mmi ttee on Public Accounts
(b) The Committee on Estimates
ee) The Committee on Public Undertakings
(d) The Committee on Petitions
3. The sales tax yo u pay whi le purchasing a
tooth paste is a
Ca) tax imposed by the Central Government
(b) tax imposed by the Ce ntral Govern ment but co ll ec ted by the State
Gove rnm ent

UPSC Questions on Indian Polity (General Studies-Prelims 20 I3- 2023)

(e) tax imposed b y the State Governm ent but collected by the Ce ntral
Government
(d) tax imposed and collected by the State
Government
4_ Which one of the following Sch edul es of
the Constitution of India contain s provisions regarding anti-defection?
(a) Second Schedule (b) Fifth Schedule
(c) Eighth Schedule (d) Thnth Schedule
5. In the Constitution of India, promotion
of internationa l p eace and security is
included in the
(a) Prea mble to the Con st itution
(b) Directive Principles of State Policy
(c) Fundamen tal Duties
(d) Ninth Schedule
6. Which of the following are associated with
' Planning' in India ?
1. The Fin a n ce Commi ss ion
2. T he Natio nal Development Coun cil.
3. The Union Ministry of Rural
Development
4. T h e Un ion M ini stry of Urban
Developm ent
5. The Parliament
Select the correct answer using the code
given b elow.
(a) 1,2 and 5 only (b) 1, 3 and 4 only
(c) 2 a nd 5 only
(d) 1, 2,3,4 and 5
7. Which of the foHowing is/ are the function /
functions of the Cabinet Secretariat?
1. Preparation of agenda for Cabinet
Meetings
2. Secretarial assistance to Cabinet Committees
3. Allocation of financial resources to the
Ministries
Select the co rrect answer using the code
given below.
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 and 3 only
(c) 1 and 2 only (d) 1,2 and 3
8. Con sider the following statements:
A Co nstitutional Government is one
which
1. places effective restrictions on individual1iberty in th e interest of State
Authority

749

2. places effective restrictions on the
Authority of the State in the interest
of individual liberty
Which of the statements given above is/ are
correct?
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(c) Both 1 a nd 2 (d) Neither 1 nor 2
9. Which of the followi ng are the discretionary
powers given to the Governor of a State?
1. Sending a report to the President of
India for imposing the President's rule
2. Appointing the Ministers
3. Reserving certain bills passed by the
State Legislature for consideration of
the President of India
4. Making the rules to co nduct the business of the State Government
Select the correct a n swer using the code
given below.
(a) 1 and 2 only
(b) 1 a nd 3 only
(c) 2, 3 a nd 4 only
(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
10. Consider the following sta tem ents:
1. The President shall make rul es fo r
the more convenient transaction of
the business of the Government of
India, a nd for the allocation among
Ministers of the said business.
2. All executive actions of the Government of India shall be expressed to
be taken in the name of the Prime
Minister.
Which of the statements given above is/ are
correct?
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(c) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neither 1 n or 2
11 . Consider the following statem ents rega rding a No-Confidence Motion in India:
1. There is no mention of a No-Confidence
Motion in the Constitution ofIndia.
2. A Motion of No-Co nfidence ca n b e
introduced in the Lok Sabha only.
Which of the statements given above is/ are
correct?
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(c) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neithe r 1 nor 2
12. The powe r of the Supre me Court of India
to decide disputes between the Centre and
the Sta tes fa lls under its

750

P

Indian Polity

(a) advisory jurisd ict ion
(b) appellate jurisdi ct io n
(c) o rigin al jurisdi ction
(d) writ ju risdi ction
13 . The power to in crea se the number of
judges in th e Supreme Co urt of India is
vested in
(a) th e Pres ident of Indi a
(b) the Parliament
(c) the Chi ef Ju sti ce of India
(d) the Law Commission

~ 2015 TEST PAPER
]. Co nsider th e fo ll owing statements regarding the Directive Prin cipl es of Sta te Policy:
]. The Prin ciples spe ll o ut the soc io·
economic democracy in the co untry.
2. The provisions co nta in ed in these
Prin cipl es are not enforceable by any
co urt.
Which of the statem ents give n above is/ are
co rrect?
(a) 1 on ly
(b) 2 only
(c) Both 1 and 2 (d) Ne ither 1 n or 2
2 . Co n sid er the follow ing stateme nts:
1. The Raj ya Sa bha has no power e ither
to reject or to a mend a Money Bill.
2. The Raj ya Sabha cannot vo te on the
Dema nds for Grants.
3. The Raj ya Sabha ca nnot di sc uss the
Annua l Fin a ncial Statement.
Which of the state ments given above is/ are
co rrect?
(a) I only
(b) 1 a nd 2 only
(e) 2 a nd 3 o nl y (d) 1,2a nd 3
3. Th e Govern m ent of Indi a Act of 19]9
clearl y defin ed
(a) the se pa rat ion of power between the
judiciary a nd the leg islature
(b) the jurisd icti on of the ce ntra l a nd
provincia l gove rnm en ts
(c) th e powers of the Secretary of State for
India and the Viceroy
(d) No ne ofthe·above
4. When a bill is referred to a joint s itting of
both the I-louses of the Parliament , it has
to be passed by

(a) a simpl e majority of members prese nt
and voting
(b) threc·fourth s m ajority of members
presen t a nd vo tin g
(c) two·thirds majority of the Hou ses
(d) abso lute majority of the I-louses
5. Th e Gove rnm en t of Indi a has established
NIT l Aayog to re place the
(a) Human Rights Co mmission
(b) Fina nce Co mmiss ion
(e) Law Co mmi ss ion
(d) Pla nning Co mmi ssion
6 . Consider the followi ng sta teme nts:
]. The Exec uti ve Power of the Union of
Ind ia is vested in the Pr ime Minister_
2. Th e Prime Ministe r is the ex offi cio
Chairma n of the Civil Services Board.
Whi ch of th e sta tem ents given above is/ are
co rrect?
(a) 1 o nl y
(b) 2 onl y
(e) Both] a nd 2 (d) Neither] nor 2
7. Th e provis io ns in Fifth Sch edu le a nd Sixth
Schedule in the Co nsti tuti on of Indi a are
made in o rder to
(a) protect th e interes ts of Sc hedul ed
TTibes
(b) determine the boundaries between
Sta tes
(c) determine the powers, authority and
responsibilities of Pan chaya ts
(d) protect the in te rests of all th e border
States
8. With reference to the Un ion Government,
co ns id er th e followin g stateme nts:
1. Th e Department of Revenue is responsibl e for the preparation of Un ion
Budge t that is prese nt ed to th e
llarliament.
2. No am o un t ca n be withdrawn fro m
the Co n s o lidated Fund of Ind ia
without the author i1.<11 ion fro m the
Parliament of In dia.
3. All th e di sburse me n ts made from
Publi c Acco unt al so need the a uth o·
ri zatioll frol11 the Pa rli ament o f
Indi a.
Whjch of th e st.1.tements given above is/are
co rrect?

UPSC Questions on Indian Polity (General Studies-Prelims 20/3-2023)

Ca) 1 and 2 only (b) 2 and 3 only
Ce) 2 only
Cd) 1, 2 and 3
9. Who/Which of the foHowing is the custodian of the Constitution of India?
(a) The President of India
(b) The Prime Minister of India
(c) The Lok Sabha Secretariat
(d) The Supreme Court of India
10. Which one of the following was given
c1assical language status recently?
Ca) adia
(b) Konkani
Ce) Bhojpuri
Cd) Assamese
n. Consider the following statements:
1. The Legislative Council of a State in
India can be larger in size that half
of the Legislative Assembly of that
particular State.
2. The Governor of State nominates the
Chairman of Legislative Council of
that particular State.
Which of the statements given above is/ are
correct?
Ca) 1 only
(b) 2 only
Ce) Both 1 and 2 Cd) Neither 1 nor 2
12. "lb uphold and protect the Sovereignty,
Unity and Integrity of Ind ia~ is a provision made in the
(a) Preamble of the Constitution
(b) Directive Principles of State Policy
Ce) Fundamental Rights
(d) Fundamental Duries
13. The fundamental object of Panchayati
Raj system is to ensure which among the
following
1. People's participation in development
2. Political accountability
3. Democratic decentralization
4. Financial mobilization
Select the correct answer using the code
given below.
Ca) 1, 2 and 3 only
(b) 2 and 4 only
Ce) 1 and 3 only
Cd) 1,2,3 and 4
14. The ideal of 'Welfare State' in the Indian
Constitution is enshrined in its
Ca) Preamble
(b) Directive Principles of State Policy
(c) Fundamental Rights
Cd) Seventh Schedule

751

15. There is a Parliamentary System of Gov·
ernment in India because the
(a) Lok Sabha is elected directly by the
people
(b) Parliament can amend the Constitution
(c) Rajya Sabha cannot be dissolved
(d) Council of Ministers is responsible to
the Lok Sabha

~ 2016 TEST PAPER
1. Which of the following statements is/ are

correct?
1. A Bill pending in the Lok Sabha lapses
on its prorogation.
2. A Bill pending in the Rajya Sabha,
which has not been passed by the
Lok Sabha, shall not lapse on dissolution of the Lok Sabha.
Select the correct answer using the code
given below.
Ca) 1 only
(b) 2 only
Ce) Both 1 and 2 Cd) Neither 1 nor 2
2. Consider the following statements:
1. The Chief Secretary in a State is
appointed by the Governor of that
State.
2. The Chief Secretary in a State has a
fixed tenure.
Which of the statements given above is/are
correct?
(b) 2 only
Ca) 1 only
Ce) Both 1 and 2 Cd) Neither 1 nor 2
3. With reference to the 'Gram Nyayalaya
Act', which of the following statements
is/ are correct?
1. As per the Act, Gram Nyayalayas can
hear only civil cases and not criminal cases.
2. The Act allows local social activists as
med ia torsi recon cilia to rs.
Select the correct answer using the code
given below.
Ca) 1 only
(b) 2 only
Ce) Both 1 and 2 Cd) Neither 1 nor 2
4. The Parliament of India acquires the power
to legislate on any item in the State List

I

752

,(J Indian Polity

in the n atio nal interest if a reso lu tion to
t hat effect is passed by th e
(a) Lok Sah ha by a sim p le majority of its
total memb ersh ip
(b) Lok Sa bh a by a m aj o ri ty of not
less t h a n two- t h irds o f i ts to ta l
me mbers hi p
(c) Raj ya Sa bh a by a si mpl e m ajority of
its tota l m e mbe rsh ip
(d) Raj ya Sab ha by a m ajority of n o t less
tha n two-th irds of its m e mbe rs presen t a nd votin g
5. Co nside r the foll owi n g sta teme n ts:
] . The minimum age presc ribed for any
perso n to be a m ember of Pa n chayat
is 25 yea rs.
2. A Pa n chayat reco nst ituted after p rem ature di sso lu tio n cont i nues o nl y
fo r the remai nder period.
Wh ich of th e statem ents given above is/ are
correct?
(aJ 1 only
(b) 2 o nly
(c) Both 1 a nd 2 (d) Ne ith er I n or 2
6. The Mo ntague-Che lm sfo rd Pro posals were
related to
(a) soc ia l refo rm s
(b) ed ucatio na l reform s
(c) re fo rms in poli ce a dmi n istrat io n
(d) co nst itu tio na l refo rms

t 2017 TEST PAPER
1. Which o ne of th e fo ll owing o bj ectives is
n ot e m bodi ed in t he Prea m ble to t he
Con stitut ion of Ind ia ?
(aJ Liberty of t ho ug ht
(b) Econ o m ic liberty
(c) Libert y of ex pressio n
(d) Liberty of be li ef
2. Th e m in d of the ma kers of th e Constitu·
ti on of India is re fl ecte d in whic h of th e
foll owing?
(aJ T he Prea mble
(b) The Fu ndam e nta l Rig hts
(c) The Directive Prin cipl es of State Policy
(d) The Fu nda m enta l Duties

3. Whic h of th e fo ll owing are env isaged by
the Ri gh t against Exp loitation in th e
Constitution of In d ia?
1. Proh ib itio n of traffic in human be ings
a nd fo rced labour
2. Abol iti o n of un to uchab ili ty
3. Protectio n of the interests of m inorities
4. Proh ibition of e mployment of children
in factor ies a nd mi nes
Select t he co rrect a n swer usin g the code
give n below:
(aJ 1,2a n d4o nly (bJ 2, 3and 4 o nly
(e) 1 a n d 4 o nly
(d) 1,2,3 a nd 4
4. Which o ne of the fo ll owing stateme n ts is
correct?
(a) Rights are cla ims of the State again st
the citi zens.
(b) Rights are privi leges which a re incorp orated i n t h e Const i tut ion of a
Sta te.
(c) Rig h ts a re cla im s of t h e c it ize ns
aga inst the State.
(d) Rights are privil eges ofa few c itizens
aga in st th e m a ny.
5. Wh ich of t he foll owi ng state m e nts is/ a re
true of the Fu ndame n ta l Du ties of an
India n ci ti ze n?
1. A legislative process has been prov ided
to e n force these duties.
2. T hey a re corre lat ive to lega l d ut ies.
Select t he co rrect a n swer us ing the code
given be low:
(aJ 1 o nly
(bJ 2 o nl y
(e) Both 1 an d 2 (d) Neithe r I n o r 2
6. In the co n text of In d ia, whi ch o ne of the
fo ll ow i ng is th e co rrect relatio n s hj p
betwee n Ri ghts a n d Dut ies?
(a) Rig hts a re corre lative with Dut ies.
(b) Righ ts a re pe rso nal a nd hence indepe ndent of soc iety a nd Duties.
(e) Rights, not Du ties, a re im portant fo r
the a d va nce m e nt of t he perso na li ty
of t he c itize n .
(d) Duties, n ot Rights, are importa n t for
t he stability of t he Sta te.
7. Whi ch pri nciple among the fo ll owing was
added to th e Directive Princ iples of State
Poli cy by the 42 nd Ame n d m en t to the
Co n st itu tion ?

UPSC Questions on Indion Polity (General
Stud

ies-Prelims 20/3-2023)

I

.

(a) Equal pay for equal work for bot
h me n
and wo me n
(b) Par tici pat ion of wo rke rs in
the ma nage me nt of ind ust ries
(e) Rig ht to wo rk, edu cat ion and
pub lic
ass ista nce
(d) Sec urin g livi ng wage and hum
an con diti ons of wo rk to wo rke rs
8. Co nsi der the foll ow ing sta tem
ent s:
Wi th reference to the Con stit utio
n of Ind ia,
the Dir ect ive Pri nci ple s of Sta
te Pol icy
con stit ute lim itat ion s upo n
1. Leg isla tive fun ctio n.
2. Exe cut ive fun ctio n.
Wh ich of the abo ve sta tem ent
s is/ are
cor rec t?
(a) I onl y
(b) 2 onl y
(e) Bot h 1 and 2 (d) Ne ithe
r 1 nor 2
9. For ele ctio n to the Lok Sab ha,
a nom ina tion pap er can be file d by
(a) An yon e res idin g in Ind ia.
(b) A res ide nt of the con stit uen cy
fro m
wh ich the ele ctio n is to be con tes
ted .
(c) An y citi zen of Ind ia wh ose
nam e
app ear s in the ele cto ral roll
of a
con stit uen cy.
(d} An y citi zen 'of Ind ia.
10. Co nsi der the foll ow ing sta
tem ent s:
1. In the ele ctio n for Lok Sab ha
or Sta te
Ass em bly , the win nin g can did
ate
mu st get at lea st 50 per cen t of
the
vot es pol led , to be dec lare d ele cte
d.
2. Acc ord ing to the pro vis ion s laid
dow n
in the Co nst itut ion of Ind ia,
in Lok
Sab ha, the Spe ake r's pos t goe
s to
tbe ma jor ity par ty and the De
put y
Spe ake r's to the Op pos itio n.
Wh ich of the sta tem ent s giv en abo
ve is/ are
cor rec t?
(a) 1 onl y
(b) 2 onl y
(e) Bot h 1 and 2 (d) Ne ithe r
1 nor 2
11. Right to' vote and to be elec ted
in Ind ia is a
(a) Fun dam ent al Rig ht
(b) Na tur al Rig ht
(e) Co nst itut ion al Rig ht
(d) Legal Rig ht
12 . Co nsi der the foll ow ing sta tem
ent s:
1. Th e Ele ctio n Co mm issi on
of Ind ia is
a five -me mb er bod y.

75 3

2. Un ion Mi nis try of Ho me
Aff airs
dec ide s the ele ctio n sch edu le for
the
con duc t of bot h ge ner al el~cti
ons
and by- ele ctio ns.
3. Ele ctio n Co mm iss ion res olv
es the
dis put es rela ting to spl its/ me rge
rs of
rec ogn ize d pol itic al par ties .
Wh ich of the sta tem ent s giv en abo
ve is/ are
cor rec t?
(a) 1 and 2 onl y (b) 2 onl y
(e) 2 and 3 onl y (d) 3 onl y
13. Wh ich of the following are
not nec ess aril y
the con seq uen ces of the pro cla
ma tio n of
the Pre sid ent 's rul e in a Sta te?
1. Dissolutio~ of the Sta te Leg
isla tive
Ass em bly
2. Rem ova l of the Co unc il of
Mi nis ters
in the Sta te
3_ Dis sol utio n of the loc al bod ies
Sel ect the cor rec t ans we r usi ng
the cod e
giv en below:
(a) 1 and 2 onl y
(b) 1 and 3 onl y
(e) 2 and 3 onl y
(d) 1,2 and 3
14. Wh ich one of the foll ow ing
is not a featur e of Ind ian fed era lism ?
(a) Th ere is an ind epe nde nt jud
icia ry in
Ind ia.
..
(b) Pow ers hav e bee n cle arl y
div ide d
bet we en the Ce ntr e and the Sta
tes.
(e) Th e fed era ting uni ts hav e bee
n giv en
une qua l rep res ent atio n in the Raj
ya
Sab ha.
(d) It is the res ult of an agr eem ent
am ong
the fed era ting uni ts.
15. Lo cal sel f-g ove rnm ent can
be bes t
exp lain ed as an exe rcis e in
(a) Fed era lism
(b) De mo cra tic dec ent rali zat ion
(c) Ad min istr ativ e del ega tion
(d) Dir ect dem ocr acy
16. Th e Par liam ent of Ind ia exe
rcis es con tro l
ove r the fun ctio ns of the Co unc
il of Ministe rs thr oug h
1. Ad jou rnm ent mo tio n
2. Qu est ion hou r
3. Sup ple me nta ry que stio ns

I
I
I
\

I

I
I

754

,rf/ Indian Polity

Select the co rrect answe r usi ng the code

g ive n below:
Ca) 1 only
(b) 2 and 3 only
Ce) 1 a nd 3 on ly Cd) 1,2 and 3
J 7. With referen ce to the Parliament of In dia,
co nside r the following statem ents:
1. A pri va te member'S bill is a bill presented by a Member of Parl iament
who is not elected b ut on ly nominated by th e Pres ide n t of Indi a .
2. Recently, .\ private me mber's bill has
been pa ssed in t he Parl ia m e nt of
India for the first t i m e in its hi sto ry.
Wh ich of th e sta tements given above is/ are
correct?
(b) 2 onl y
Ca) 1 only
Ce) Both 1 and 2 (d) Ne ither 1 nor 2
18. The mai n adva ntage of the parliamentary
for m of gove rnm e nt is that
(a) Th e execut ive and legi slature work
i ndepende ntl y.
(b) It provides co ntinuity of poli cy a nd is
mo re effic ient.
(c) The executive rema ins respons ible to
the legi slature.
(d) The h ead of the government ca nnot
be c hanged without election.
1g. Out of t he fo llowing state ments, choose the
o ne that brings out the principle un derlying the Cabinet form of Governme n t:
(a) An arrangement for minimi zing the
cr iticism against the Govern m ent
whose responsi bili t ies are complex
and hard to ca rry out to the sat isfact ion of a ll.
(b) A mechanism for speedin g up the
act ivit ies of the Govern ment whose
respo nsibili t ies are in creasing day by
day.
(c) A me c h an i s m of parliam e ntary
democracy for e n su ri ng co ll ective
respons ibi1ity of the Govern m e n t to
th e people.
(d) A device for strengthe ning the hand s
of the head of the Government whose
hold over the people is i n a state of
decline.
20 . In Indi a, Judicial Review impli es

(a) Th e powe r of the Judi ci ary to pronou nce u po n the co nstitut io na lity
of laws and executive ord e rs.
(b) The power of the Judiciary to question
the wisdom of the laws enacted by
the Legi slatures.
(c) The power of the J udi c iary to rev iew
a ll the legi slative enactments before
they are asse n ted to by the Preside n t.
(d) The power of th e Jud iciary to rev iev,'
its OW I1 judgem e nts given ea rl ier in
sim il a r or different cases.
21. Democracy's su perior virtue li es i n th e
fact that it calls into activity
(a) The in telligence a nd character of ordinary men a nd women.
(b) The methods for strengtheni ng executive le<ld ership.
(c) A su perior in di vid ual with d y nami sm
and vision.
(d) A ba nd of ded icated party wo rke rs.
22. O ne of the imp l ications of equ al ity in
soc iety is the a bse nce of
(a ) Pri vil eges
(b) Restra ints
(c) Competition (d) Ideology

t 2018 TEST PAPER
]. In the federation establ ished by the Gove rnm e n t on India Act of 1935, Resid uacy
Power were given to the
(a) Federa l Leg islature
(b) Governor Ge nera l
( c) Provincial Legisl<lture
(d) Provincial Gove rnors
2. Co n si der t he fo ll owin g sta tem ents :
]. Aadhaar card ca n be used as a p roof
of c iti zenshi p o r domici le.
2. Once issued, Aadhaa r numbe r canuot
be deactivated or o mi tted by the Issuing Authority.
Whi ch of the statements give n above is/ are
correct?
Ca) 1 on ly
(b) 2 on ly
(c) Both I and 2 (d ) Neither] nOT 2
3. Right to Priv<lcy is protected as an in t rinsi c
part of Right to Life and Persona l Liberty.

,

UPSC Questions on Indian Polity (General Studies-Prelims 2013-2023)

Which of the following in the Constitution of India correctly and appropriately
imply the above statement?
(a) Article 14 and the provisions under
the 42nd Amendment to the
Constitution
(b) Article 17 and the Directive Principles
of State Policy in Part IV
(c) Article 21 and the freedoms guaranteed in Part. III
(d) Article 24 and the provisions under the
44th Amendment to the Constitution
4. With reference to the election of the
President of India, consider the following
statements:
1. The value of the vote of each MLA varies from State to State.
2. The value of the vote ofMPs of the Lok
Sabha is more than the value of the
vote of MPs of the Rajya Sabha.
Which of the statements given above is/ are
Correct?
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(e) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neither 1 or 2
5. Consider the following statements:
1. No criminal proceedings shall be
instituted against the Governor of
a State any court during his term
of office.
2. The emoluments and allowances of
the Governor of a State shall not be
diminished during his tenn of office.
Which of the statements given above is/are
correct?
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(e) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neither 1 nor 2
6. With reference to the Parliament of India,
which of the following Parliamentary
Committees scrutinizes and reports to
the House whether the powers to make
regulations, rules, sub-rules, by-laws, etc.
conferred by the Constitution or del·e gated by the Parliament are being properly exercised by the Executive within the
scope of such delegation?
(a) Committee on Government Assurances
(b) Committee on Subordinate Legislation
ee) Rules Committee
Cd) Business Advisory Committee

755

7. Consider the following statements:
1. The Speaker of the Legislative Assembly shall vacate his/ her office if he/
she ceases to be a member of the
Assembly.
2. Whenever the Legislative Assembly is
dissolved, the Speaker shall vacate
his/ ber office immediately.
Which of the statements given above is/ are
correct?
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(e) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neither 1 nor 2
8. If the President of India exercises his power
as provided under Article 356 of the Constitution in respect of a particular State,
then
(a) the Assembly of the State is automatica11y dissolved.
(b) the powers of the Legislature of that
State shal1 be exercisable by or under
the authority of the Parliament.
(c) Article 19 is suspended in that State.
(d) the President can make laws relating
to that State.
9. Consider the following statements:
1. The Parliament of India can place a
particular law in the Ninth Schedule
of the Constitution of India.
2. The validity of a law placed in the
Ninth Schedule cannot be examined
by any court and no judgement can
be made on it.
Which of the statements given above is/ are
correct?
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(e) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neither I nor 2
]0. Consider the fol1owing statements:
1. In the first 10k Sabha, the single largest party in the opposition was the
Swatantra Party.
2. In the Lok Sabha, a "Leader of the
Opposition" was recognized for the
first time in1969.
3. In the Lok Sabha, if a party does not
have a minimum of 75 members, its
leader cannot be recognized as the
Leader of the Opposition.
Which of the statements given above is/ are
correct?

756

P

Indian Polity

(a) 1 and 3 on ly (b) 2 on ly
(c) 2 and 3 onl y (d) 1, 2 and 3
11. Whkh o ne of th e fo llmvi ng refl ects t he
ni cest, appropriate rela tionship between
law and lib e rty?
(a) i f the re a rc more Jaws, th ere is less
liberty.
(b) If th ere are no laws, the re is no liberty.
ee) lfthere is liberty, laws have to be made
by l he peo ple.
Cd) If laws are cha nged too often, liberty
is in dan ger.
12. Whi ch of th e foll owing a rc rega rded a s
th e ma in features of the "Rul e of Law"?
1. Limitation of powers
2. Equa lity before la w
3. Pe opl e's r es p o n s ibilit y t o th e
Government
4. Libe rty and c ivi1 fights
Select th e correct an swe r using th e code
give n be low:
(a) 1 and 3 onl y
(b) 2 and 4 onl y
(c) 1, 2 an d 4 only (d) 1,2,3 and 4
13. Co n side r the followin g sta te me nts:
] . As p er the Right to Edu cation ( RI'E)
Act, to be eligibl e for appointm ent as
a teache r in a Sta te, a person would be
requ ired to possess the minimum qual·
ifica tioll laid down by th e con cerned
Sta te Council of Thacher Edu cati on .
2. As per the RTE Act, for teaching prj·
mary classes, a candidate is required
to pass a Teac he r Eli gibility Tes t
cond ucted in accorda n ce with the
Nati o nal Coun c il of Tha che r Edu ca·
tion guid el in e s.
3. In India, more th a n 9096 of teache r
e du ca tion in stitutio n s a re directly
und e r the State Governments.
Which of the stateme nts give n above is/ a re
co r rect?
(a) 1 and 2
(b) 2 onl y
(c) 1 a nd 3
(d) 3 onl y
14. How is th e Nati o nal Gree n Tribun a l
(NGT) diffe re nt fro m th e Ce n tra l Poil u·
ti on Control Board (CPCB)?
1. Th e NGT ha s bee n es ta blish ed by
a n Act whe reas the CPCE has been

cr ea ted by a n executi ve ord e r of' th e
Gove rnm e nt.
2 . Th e N GT p rov id es e n vi ro nme nta l
justi ce a nd helps reduce the burde n of
litigation in the higher courts whe reas
th e CPCB promotes clea nlin ess of
streams and wells, a nd a ims to improve
the quality of air in th e coun try.
Which of the st.:1 te me nts given ab ove is/ a re
co rrect?
(a) 1 o nl y
(b) 2 o nl y
(c) Both 1 and 2 (d) Ne ither 1 nor 2
15. Regarding Mon ey Bill, whi ch of the followi ng sta te ment is n ot correct?
(a) A bill sha ll be dee med to be a Mon ey
Bill if it conta in s onl y provis ion s
relati ng to i mposit io n , a bol it io n,
re mi ss ion , a lteration or regul a tion
o f any tax .
(b) A Money Bill has p rov ision s for t he
custody of th e Con so l ida ted Fun d of
Indi a or th e Contin ge n cy Fund of
Indi a.
(c) A Mo ney b ill is conce rn ed with the
a ppropriati on of mon eys out of th e
Contingen cy Fund of India.
(d) A Mo ney Bill deals with t he regula tion
of bor rowing of mon ey o r givin g of
a ny gua rantee by th e Govern me nt of
1ndia .

~ 2019TEST PAPER
]. Whi ch Article of th e Co nstitut ion of India
sa fegua rds on e 's ri ght to marry the pe rso n of o ne's c hoice?
(a) Articl e 19
(b) Articl e 21
(c) Art icl e 25
(d) Article 29
2. Under which schedul e of the Con sti tuti on
o f India Can th e tra n sfer of t riba l la nd
to priva te pa rti es fo r minin g be d ecla red
null a nd vo id?
(a) T hird Schedul e (b) Fifth Sched ul e
(c) Ninth Schedule (d) 1\,'elfth Schedul e
3. Con sider th e fo n owin g sta te me nts:
1. As per recen t a me ndme nt to the India
Forest Act, 1927, forest dwell e rs have
th e right to fe ll th e ba mboos grown
o n th e forest a reas.

UPSC Questions on Indian Polity (General Studies-Prelims 2013-2023)

,

2. As per the Scheduled Tribes and Other
Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006,
bamboo is a minor forest produce.
3. The Scheduled Tribes and other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition
of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 allows
ownership ,C!f minor forest p'roduce
to forest dwellers.
Which of the statements given abov~ i~/~re
correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only (b) 2 and 3 only
(e) 3 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
4 ~ Consider the following statements:
1. The 44th Amendment to the Constitution of India introduced ap Article placing the election of the Prime
Minister beyond judicial revi~w.
2. The Supreme Court of India ,struck
down the 99th Amendment to the
Constitution of India as being,viola.
tive of the independence of judiciary.
Which of the statements given above is/ are
correct?
(a) 1 only , .
(b) 2 only
..
(e) Both 1 and 2 (b) Neither 1 nor 2
·5" The Ninth Schedule was introduced. in the
Cona;titution of India during the prime
ministership of
(a) Jawaharlal Nehru
(b) Lal Bahadur Shastri
(e) Indira Gandhi
(d) Morarji Desai
6. With reference to the Constitution ofIndia,
consider the following statements:
1. No High Court shall have the jurisdiction to declare any central law to be
constituti,o nally invalid.
2. An amendment to the Constitution of
India cannot be called into question
by the Supreme Court .of India. ,;.;
Which of the stai~ffi~ftts' giv~h labdve is/
are correct?
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(e) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neither 1 nor 2
7~ With reference to the constitution of India,
prohibition or limitations or provisions
contained in ordinary Jaws cannot act as

'757

prohibitions or limitations on the constitutional powers under Article 142. It could
mean which one of the following? .,
(a) The decisions taken by the Election
Commission of India while discharging its duties can not be chall~~ged
in any court of law.
(b) The Supreme Court ofIndia is not constrained in the exercise of its powers
by laws made by the parliament.
(c) In the event of grave financial crises
in the country, the President of India
can declare Financial Emergency
without the counsel from the cabinet.
(d) State Legislatures can not make laws
on certain matters without the concurrence of the Union legislature.
8. Consider the following statements:
1. The motion to impeach a judge of the
Supreme Go.urt of India cannot be
rejected by, the Speaker of th~ Lok
Sabha as per the Judges (Inquiry.)
Act, 1968.
2. The constitution of India defines
and gives details of what constitutes
'incapacity and proved misbehaviour'
of the judges of the Supreme Court of
India.
3. The details of the process ,o f the
impeachment of the judges of the
Supreme Court ofIndia are given in
the judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968.
4. Uthe motion of the impeachment of
a judge is taken up for voting, the
law requires the motion to be ,backed
.
by each house of the parliament
and supported by a majority of total
membership of that house and by not
less than two-thirds of total members
of that House present and vot ing.
Which of the statements given above is/ are
correct?
I,
(a) 1 and 2
(b) 3 only
(e) 3 and 4 only (d) 1,3 and 4
9. Which one of the following suggested that
the Governor should.be an ern inept person from outside the State and should be a
detached figure without intense political

.

751 l 'l,ndion Polity
lin ks or sho uld not have taken part in
po litics in the recent past?
(a) Fi rst AdministTative Reform s Co mmi ssio n ( .1 966)
(b) R.ajamannar Com mittee ( 1969)
ee) Sarkaria Comm issio n (1983)
( d) Nationa l Commission to Review the
'Vork ing of th e Co nstitution (2000)
10. Co nsider the following statements:
1. The Pa rliament (Prevention of Di squalification) Ac t, 1959 exempts
seve ra l posts from di squalifi cat ion
on the grounds of 'Office of Profit'.
Z. The above-m entioned Act was a mended
five ti m eso
3. Th e term 'Office of Profit' is well defined in t he Co n st itut ion of Indi a.
Which of the statemen ts give n above is/ are
co rrect?
(a) I a nd 2 only (b) 3 only
(e) 2 and 3 o nl y ( d ) 1,2 an d 3
11 . With reference to the Leg isla ti ve Assembly of a State in Ind ia, co nsider the following state ments:
I. The Gove rnor makes a c usto mary
a ddress to me mbers of t he ho use at
the com m encement of t he first sessio n of the year.
2. When a St.-lte Legislature does not have
a rule on th e particular matter, it fo llows the Lok Sabha rul e on that matter.
Which of t he stateme nts give n above is/ a re
co rrec t?
(a) 1 o nl y
(b) 2 only
(c) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neithe r 1 nor 2
1 2. In t he context of polity, wh ich o ne of the
follow ing would yo u accept as the most
a ppropriate definition of liberty?
(a) Pro tec ti on again st the ty ran ny of
politica l rulers
(b) Abse n ce of restraint
(c) Opport unity to do whatever o ne likes
(d) Opportunity to deve lop o nese lf fu ll y.
13. Co n sider t he fo ll owin g state me n ts about
't he Cha rter Act of 181 3':
1. It ended the trade monopo ly of t he
East In dia Com pa ny in India except
for trade in tea and trade wit h China.

2. It asserted the sovereignty of the British Crown over th e I ndi an territories
held by the Co mpa ny.
3. T he reve nu es of India were n ow co ntro ll ed by the British Parliament.
Whi c h of the statemen ts given above are
co rrect?
(a) ] a nd 2 onl y (b) 2 and 3 on ly
(e) I a nd 3 o nl y (d ) 1,2 a nd 3
14. In India, which of the fo llO\ving review the
independent regulators in sectors like teleco m mu n icatians, i nsura nee, electricity,
etc.?
1. Ad Hoc Com mi ttees set np by the
Parli a ment
2. Pa rli amentary Depa rtme n t Re lated
Sta nding Comm ittees
3. Finance Co mmission
4. Finan cia l Sec to r Legisl.1tive Re form s
Comm iss ion
5 . NIT] Aayog
Se lect the co rrect answer us in g th e code
given below.
(a) ] and 2
(b) 1,3 and 4
(c) 3,4 a nd 5
(d ) 2 and 5
] .5. Consider the fo ll owin g sta tements:
1. Pe troleum a nd Natu ral Gas Regu latory
Board ( PNGRB) is th e first regulatory
body se t up by th e Govemme nt of
Ind ia.
2. One of the ta sks of PNGRB is to ensure
compet iti ve markets fo r gas.
3. Ap pea ls agai n st th e decis ions of
PNGRB go be fore the Appe ll ate Tribunals for Electrici fY.
\\Thi ch of th e statements give n above are
co rrect?
(a) I and 2 onl y (b) 2 and 3 only
(c) I and 3 o n ly (d) 1,2<1nd3

t 2020 TEST PAPER
1. Co nsid er the fo ll owi ng sta temel1ts:
1. Aadhaar metadata cannot be stored for
more than t hree month s.
2. Sta te ca nn ot e nter in to any co ntra ct
with p riva te co rporations fOT shar ing
of Aad haar data .

UPSC Questions on Indian Polity (General Studies-Prelims 2013-2023)

•-

3. Aadhaar is mandatory for obtaining
insurance products.
4 . Aadhaar is mandatory for getting benefits funded out of the Consolidated
Fund of India.
Which of the statements given above is/are
correct?
Ca) I and 4 only (b) 2 and 4 only
(c) 3 only
Cd) 1,2 and 3 only
2'. Rajya Sabha has equal powers with Lok
Sabha in
( a) the matter of creating new All India
Services
(0) amending the Constitution
fC) the removal of the government
(d) making cut motions
3. With reference to the funds under Members
of Parliament Local Area Development
Scheme CMPLADS), which of the following statements are correct?
1. MPLADS funds must be used to create
durable assets like physical infrastructure for health, education, etc.
2. A specified portion of each MP's fund
must benefit SC/ ST populations,
3. MPLADS funds are sanctioned on
year1y basis and the unused funds
cannot be carried forward to the next
year.
4. The district authOrity must inspect
at least 10% of all works under implementation every year,
Select the correct answer using the code
given below:
Ca) I and 2 only
(b) 3 and 4 only
Ce) 1,2 and 3 only Cd) 1,2 and 4 only
4. Which onc of the following categories of
Fundamental Rights incorporates protection against untouchability as a form of
discrimination?
Ca) Right against Exploitation
(b) Right to Freedom
(c) Right to Constitutional Remedies
Cd) Right to Equality
5. In India, separation of judiciary from the
executive is enjoined by
(a) the Preamble of the Constitution
(b) a Directive Principle of State Policy

Cc) the Seventh Schedule
(d) the conventional practice
ti . Along with the Budget, the Finance Minister also places other documents before
the Parliament which include 'The Macro
Economic Framework Statement'. The
aforesaid document is presented because
this is mandated by
(a) Long standing parliamentary
convention
(b) Article lI2 and Article lIOCI) of the
Constitution of India
(c) Article 113 ofthe Constitution ofIndia
(d) Provisions of the Fiscal Responsibility
and Budget Management Act, 2003
7. A constitutional government by definition
is a
(a) government by legislature
(b) popular government
(c) multi-party government
(d) limited government
8. Other than the Fundamental Rights, which
of the following parts of the Constitution
of India reflect/reflects the principles and
provisions ofthe Universal Declaration of
Human Rights (1948)?
1. Preamble
2. Directive Principles of State Policy
3. Fundamental Duties
Select the correct answer using the code
given below:
Ca) I and 2 only (b) 2 only
Cc) I and 3 only (d) 1,2 and 3
9. In India, Legal Services Authorities provide
free legal services to which of the following type of citizens?
1. Person with an annual income of less
than n,oo,OOO
2. Transgender with an annual income
ofless than tz,oo,OOO
3. Member of Other Backward Classes
(aBC) with an annual income of less
than ~3,OO,OOO
4. All Senior Citizens
Select the correct answer using the code
given below:
Ca) I and 2 only (b) 3 and 4 only
Cc) 2 and 3 only Cd) I and 4 only

L

760

jJ

Ind;on PaUty

10. A Parliamcl1t..1fY System of Gover n m e nt
is one in whi ch
(a) all politi ca l partie s in the Parlia ment
a rc repres e n ted in the Gover nmen t
( b) the Gove rnm e nt is respon sible to t he
Parlia ment and ca n be remov ed by it
(e ) th e Gove rnm e n t is electe d by the
peo pl e an d can be remov ed by them
( d) the Gover nme n t is chose n by the Parli amen t but canno t be remov ed by it
before co mpl et io n of a fixed term
11. Whi c h part of the Co nst it ut ion of India
declar es the idea l of Welfare State?
(a) Direct ive Princ ipl es of State Poli cy
(b) Fu ndam ental Rights
ee) Pream bl e
(d) Seve nth Sched ule
12 . Consi der the fo ll owi ng statem en ts:
1. The Co nstitu tion of Ind ia defin es its
'basi c struct ure ' in term s of federa lis m, secu laris m, funda menta l rights
a nd demo cra cy.
2. T he Const itut ion of Ind ia p rovide s
for 'judic ial review ' to safeg uard the
citize ns' liberti es and to preser ve the
ideals on which the Co nsti tu tion is
based.
Which of the sta tem ents given above is/ are
co rrect ?
(b) 2 on ly
Ca) 1 o nly
Ce) Both 1 and 2 (d) Ne ither 1 nor 2
13. O n e comm on agree m ent betwe en
Ga ndh ism and Marxi sm is
(a) the final goa l of a state less Societ y
(b) class strugg le
(c) abol itio n of privat e prope rty
(d) eco nom ic determ inism
14. In the co ntext of Ind ia, whi ch one of t he
follow ing is the charac teristi c appro priate
for burea ucrac y?
(a) An agenc y for widen ing the sco pe of
parlia me ntary demo cracy
(b) An agency for stre ngthe ning the struc·
ture of federa lism
(c) An agenc y for facil itati n g politic al
stabi lity and econo mic growt h
(d) An agenc y for the imple menta tion of
publ ic pol icy

15. The Pream bl e to t h e Const ituti o n of
India is
(a) a part of the Co nst itut io n but has no
lega l effect
(b) not a part of the Co nstitu ti on and has
no leg.::1i e ffe ct e ith e r
( c ) a part of the Constituti on and has the
sa me lega l effect as any other part
(d) a part of t he Co nstitu tion but has no
legal effect indep e nd ently of other
parts
16. With refere nce to t h e provis ions COil ·
tained in Part IV of the Const itution of
Ind ia, whic h of the fo ll owing state me nts
is/ are correc t?
I . Th ey shall be enforc eab le by courts .
2. They shall not be enforc eab le by any
co urt.
3. The princ ipl es laid down in this part
are to influe nce th e makin g of laws
by the State.
Select the correc t answe r usi ng the code
given below :
(b) 2 only
Ca) 1 on ly
Cc) I and 3 on ly Cd) 2 and 3 o nl y
17. Co nsider th e fo ll owin g statem e nts:
1. Accor ding to the Consti tution of Ind ia ,
a person who is e lig ibl e to vote can
be made a mini ste r in a State fo r six
month s eve n if he/ she is not a mem ber of t he Legisl ature of that Sta te.
2. Accor di ng to the Repre se ntati on of
Peopl e Act, ] 951 , a person co nvicte d
of a cr im ina l offen ce and se nte nced
to impri sonm ent for five years is permane ntly disqua lified from co n testing an electio n eve n after his rel~,se
from prison .
'Which of the statem e n ts given above is/ arc
co rrect?
(b) 2 only
Ca) 1 only
Neith er I nor 2
(d)
2
and
1
(c) Both
18. Co nsider the follow ing statem ents:
I. The Presi den t of IncLia can su mm on
a sess ion of the Parlia ment a[ such
place as he/ she thinks fit.
2. The Co nstitu ti on of India provid es
for three, sess ions of the Parlia ment

,

UPSC Questions on Indian Polity (General Studies-Prelims 2013-2023)

in a yea r, but it is not mandatory to
conduct all three sessions.
3. There is no minimum number of days
that th e Parliament is required to
meet in a year.
Which of the statements given above is/a re
correct?
Ca) I only
(b) 2 only
Ce) I a nd 3 only Cd) 2 a nd 3 only

~ 2021 TEST PAPER
1. Consider the f01l0win g statem ents:

1. The Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms of
1919 recomm ended granting voti ng
rights to all the women above th e age
of 21.
2. The Government of India Act of
1935 gave women reserved seats in
legislature.
Which of the statements given above is/ are
correct?
Ca) I only
, .
(b) 2 o nly
Ce) Both I and 2
Cd) Neither 1 nor 2
2. We adopted parliamenta ry demo cracy
based on the British model, but how does
our model differ from that model? '
1. As rega rds legislation, the British Parli ament is su preme or sovereig'n but
in Indi a, the powe r of the Parliam ent
to legislate is limited.
2. In India , matters related to the co nstitutionality of the Amendment of
an Act of the Parliament are referred
to the Con stituti o n Bench by the
Supre me Court.
Select th e co rrect an swer using the code
given below.
Ca) 1 only
(b) 2 only
Ce) Both I and 2 Cd) Neither 1 nor 2
3 . With reference to the Union Governm ent,
co nsider the following statements:
]. N. Gopa laswamy Iyen ga r Committee
suggested that a mini ster and a secreta ry be designated solely for pursuing th e subject of administrative
reform and prom otin g it.
.

161

2. In 1970, the Department of Personnel
was con stituted on the recommendation of the Administrative Reform s
Co mmi ssion, 1966, and this was
placed under the Prime Mini ste r's
cha rge.
Whi ch of the statements given above is/ are
co rrect?
Ca) I only
, (b) 2 o nly
Ce) Both 1 and 2 Cd) Neither 1 nor 2
4. 'Right to Privacy' is protected under whi ch
Article of the Constitution of India?
Ca) Article 15
(b) Article 19
Ce) Article 21
Cd) Article 29
5. With referen ce to Indi a, con sider the following statements:
]. Judicial custody means an accused is
in the custody of the concern ed magistrate and such accused is locked up
in police station , not in jail.
2. During judicial cu stody, the ' police
offi cer in charge of the case is not
allowed to interrogate th e suspect
without the approval of the court.
Which of the statements given above is/ are
correct?
Ca) 1 o nly
(b) 2 only
Ce) Both 1 and 2 Cd) Neither I nor 2
6. With referen ce to India, consider the
following statements:
1. Wh en a priso n er makes out a sufficie n t case, parole ca nnot b e dcmied
to such prisoner because it beco mes
a matter of his/ h er right.
2. State Governments have thei r ,own
Prisoners Release on Parole Rul es.
Which of the statements given above is/ are
correct?
I.
Ca) I only
(b) 2 only
Ce) Both 1 and 2 Cd) Neither I nor 2
7. At the n ational level, which ministry is
the nodal agency to e n sure effec ti ve
implementation of the Scheduled Tribes
and Other Traditiona l Forest Dwellers
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, Z006?
(a) Mini strY of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change
(b) Ministry of Panchayati Raj

762 ,(7 Indian Pality
ee) Ministry of Rural Development

Cd) Ministry of Tribal Affairs
8. A legi slation which confers on the executive or administrative authority an
unguided and uncontrolled di scretionary
power in the matter of app l ication of
law violates wh ich onc of the following
Articles of the Constit ution of India ?
(a) Article 14
(b) Article 28
(e) Art icle 32
(d) Article 44
9. Which one of the following in Indian pol·
ity is an esse ntial feature that indicates
that it is federal in character?
Ca) The ind epe ndence of judiciary is
safeguarded.
(b) The Union Legislature ha s elected
representatives from co nstitu e nt
units.
(e) The Union Cabinet ca n have elected
representatives from regional parties.
Cd) The fundamental Rights are enforceable by Co urts of Law.
10. Which one of the following best defines
the term 'State'?
(a) A community of persons permanentl y
occupying a definite territory independent of external control and possessing an organized government
(b) A politically organized peop le of a
definite territory and possessing an
authority to govern them, ma intain
law al)d order, protect their natural
rights 'and safegua rd their mean s of
suste nance
(c) A number of persons who have been
living in a definite territory for a
very long time with their own culture, tradition and government
(d) A society permanently li ving in a
definite territory with a central
authority, an executive responsible
to the ce ntral authority and an independent judiciary
n. With reference to Indian judiciary, consider the following statements:
1. Any retired judge of the Sup reme
Court of India can be ca lled back to
sit and act as a Supreme Court judge

by the Chief Justice of India w ith
prior permission of the President of
India .
2. A High Court in India has the power
to review its own judgement as the
Supreme Court does.
Which of the statem ents given above is/are
correct?
(b) 2 only
(a) 1 only
( e) Both 1 and 2 (d) Ne ither I nor 2
12 . With reference to India , co nsider the following statements:
1. There is on ly one citizenship a nd one
domici le.
2. A citizen by birth on ly can become
the Head of State.
3 . A foreigner once granted the citizenship cannot be deprived of it under
any circumstances.
Which of the state ments given above is/are
correct?
(a) I only
(b) 2 on ly
(d) 2 and 3
( e) I and 3
13. Which one of the following factors co nst itutes the best safeguard of liberty in a
liberal democracy?
(a) A com mitted judiciary
(b) Centralization of powers
(c) Elected government
(d) Separation of powers
14. Under the Indian Co nstitution, con centration of wealth violates
(a) the Right to Equality
(b) the Directive Principles of State Policy
(c) the Right to Freedom
(d) the Concept of Welfare
15_ What is the position of the Right to Pm p·
erty in India ?
(a) Legal right avai lable to c itizens on ly
(b) Legal right available to any person
(c) Fundamental Right available to citi zens only
(Ii) Neither Fundamental Right nor legal
right
16 . What was the exact constitutional status
of India on 26th January, 1950?
(a) A Democratic Republic
(b) A Sovereign Democratic Republic

UPSC Questions on Indian Polity (General Studies-Prelims 20/3-2023)

( c) A Sovereig n Sec ular Demo c rat ic
Re publ ic
(d) A Sovereig n Soc ialist Secu lar Dem oc rati c Republi c
17. Co nstitutional gove rnm eIH mean s
(a) a rep resentative gove rnm e nt of a
nat ion with fe deral stru ctu re
(b) a government whose 1·leat! enjoys
nomina l powers
(e) a goverlll11c nl whose I-lead enjoys real
powers
(d) a gove rnment lim ited by tbe term s of
the Con stituti on
1ft. Consi der t he fo ll owing statements in
respect of sharat Ratna and Padma Awards:
I . Bharar R.'J.tna and Padma Awa rds are
titles u nde r thc Art icle 18( 1) of th e
Co nst i(Uti on of India.
2 . Padma Awards, which were in st ituted
in the year 1954, we re s uspe nd ed
o n lyonce.
3. The number of Sharar R.'ltna Awards
is restri cted to a maximum of five in
a parti cu lar year.
Whi c h of the above statementS are not
cor rect?
(a)
and 2 onl y (b) 2 an d 3 o nly
(e) I and 3 o n ly (d ) 1, 2 a nd 3

t 2022 TEST PAPI!R

I

i
!

1. Con s ider the following statements:
I . Pursuant (0 the report of I-I. N. Sanya l
Comminee. the Co ntempt of Co urts
Act, 1971 was pa ssed.
2. T he Co nstitution of India empowers
th e Supreme Co urt and th e High
Co urt s to puni sh for co ntempt of
themselves.
3 . The Co nstitution of India defines Civil
CO lHcmpt and Crimina l Co nte mpt.
4. In Ind ia, the I>arliament is vested with
the powers to make l aws on Contempt of Court.
Wh ich of the stateme nts given above is/ are
co rrec t?
(a) I and 2 on ly (b ) 1,2 a nd 4
(c) 3 and'" onl y ( d) 3 onl y

763

2. With reference to India , consider the fo llowing state men ts:
1. Gove rnm e nt law o ffi cers a nd legal
firm s are recog ni sed as advocates,
but corpo rate la wyers an d patent
a ttorn eys are excluded from recogn j.
tion as advocates.
2. Bilr Cou nci ls h;we the power to lay
d ow n the rules re lating to legal
edu cati o n ilnd recognition of IClw
colleges.
Which of the state ments given above is/ nrc
co rrect?
(b) 2 o n ly
(a) I o n ly
(e) Both I a nd 2 (d) Ne ither ] nor 2
3. Co ns id e r the following stCltements:
I. A bill amending the ConstilUtion
requires a prior reco lllme ndation of
thc President of India.
2. When a Co nstitutio n Amendment Bill
is presented to the Pres ident of Ind ia,
it is obligatory for the President of
Indi a to give hi s/ her assent.
3. A Constitution Amendme nt Bill mllst
be p<:lssed by both the Lok Sabh a and
the Raj ya Sabha by a special majo r ity
and th ere is no prov ision for joint
si lting.
Whi c h of the statements given a bove a rc
co r rect?
(a) I and 2 on ly (b) 2 and 3 only
( c) I a nd 3 on ly (d ) 1, 2 an d 3
4. Con si de r the rollowing sta tements:
1. The Co nstitution of India cla ss ifi es
the mini sters into fo u r ranks viz.
Ca bin e t Minister, Minister of State
with Independent Charge, Minister
ofSwte and Deputy Minister.
2. The lOwl number of mini sters in the
Union Gove rnment , including the
Prime r>. lini ster, shall not exceed 15
pe rce nt of the total number of members in the Lok Sabha.
Which of the state me nts given above is/ are
co rrect?
(a) I onl y
( b) 2 only
( c) Both I and 2 ( d) Neither 1 nor 2

764

,€,! Indian Polity

5. Which of the following is/ are the exclusive
power(s) of Lok Sabha?
1. Th ratify the declaration of Emergency
2. 'Tb pa ss a m otion of n o·confiden ce
agai n st the Council of Ministers
3. 1b impeach the President of India
Select the correct answer using the code
given below:
(a) I and 2
(b) 2 only
(e) I and 3
(d) 3 only
6. with reference to a nti·defe ction law in
India, con sider the following statements:
1. The law speci fies that a nominated
legi slator cannot join any political
party within six months of being
appoi n ted to the House.
2. The law does not p rov ide a ny ti m e·
frame within which th e presiding
officer h as to decide a defection
case.
Which of the statem en ts given above is/ are
correct?
(a) I only
(b) 2 only
(e) Both I and 2 (d) Neither I nor 2
7. Con sider the following statem ents:
1. Attorney General ofIndia and Solicitor
General of India are the only officers
of the Governm ent who are allowed
to p artici pate in the meetings of the
Parliam ent of India .
2. Acco rdin g to th e Con st itution of
India , th e Attorney General of India
submits his resignation when tJ:te
Government wh ich appointed him
resign s.
Which ofthe statements given above is/ are
correct?
(a) I only
(b) 2 only
(e) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neither I nor 2
8. With reference to th e writs issued by the
Courts in India, co n sider the followin g
state ments:
1. Mandamus will n ot li e aga inst a
p ri vate organisation unl ess it is
entrusted with a public duty.
2. Mandamus will not li e agai nst a
Compa ny even though it may be a
Government Co mpany.

3. Any public minded perso n ca n be
a petiti on er to m ove the Court to
obtain the writ of Quo Warranto.
Whi ch of the statem en ts given above are
correct?
(a) I and 2 on ly (b) 2 a nd 3 only
(e) I and 3 only (d) 1,2 and 3
9. With reference to Deputy Speaker of Lok
Sabha, con sider the following statem en ts:
1. As ·per the Rules of Procedure and
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha,
the election of Deputy Speaker shall
b e held on such date as the Speaker
may fix.
2. There is a manda tory provision that
the election of a ca ndidate as Deputy
Speaker of Lok Sabha shaH be from
either the principal opposition party
or the ruling party.
3. The Deputy Speaker has the same
power as of the Spea ker when presid·
ing over the sitting of the House and
n o appeal1ies agai n st hi s rulings.
4. The well established parliamentary
practi ce regarding the appointment
of Deputy Speaker is that the motion
is moved by the Speaker and duly
seconded by the Prime Minister.
Which of the state.m ents given abov~ are
.
.
correct?
(a) 1 and 3 only (b) 1,2 and 3
(e) 3 and 4 only (d) 2 and 4 on ly
10. In the Government of India Act 1919, the
fu n ctions' of Provincial Governm ent were
divided into "Reserved- and "'Transferredsubjects. Which of the following were
trea ted as " Reserved ~ subjects?
1. Administration of Justice
2. Local Self-Govern ment
3. Land Revenue
4. Police
Select the correct answe r usi n g the code
give n below:
(a) 1,2 a nd 3
(b) 2,3 and 4
(e) 1,3 and 4
(d) 1, 2 and 4
11. If a particular a rea is brought under the
Fifth Sch edul e of th e Con stitution of

I

766

,rfJ Indian Polity

1. When the Lok Sabha transmits Finance
Bill to the Rajya Sabha, it can amend
or reject the Bil l.
2. When the Lok Sabha transmits Money
Bill to the Rajya Sabha, it cannot
amend or reject the Bi ll , it can only
make recommendat ions.
3. In the case of d isagreeme n t between
the Lok Sabha and th e Rajya Sabha,
there is no jO in t sitting for Money
Bill, but a joint sitt in g becomes nec·
essary for Fin ance Bill.
How ma ny of the above statements are
correct?
(a) Only one
(b) Only two
(e) All three
(d) None
8 . With reference to 'Scheduled Areas' in
India, consider the fo llowing stateme n ts:
1. With in a State, the notificat ion of an
area as Scheduled Area takes place
through an Order of the President.
2. The la rgest administrative un it forming the Scheduled Area is the District
and the lowest is the cluster of villages in the Block.
3. The Ch ief Min isters of the concerned
States are required to submit annual
reports to the Union Home Ministry
on the adm ini stration of Schedu led
Areas in the States.
How ma ny of the above statements are
correct?
(a) On ly one
(b) On ly two
(c) All three
(d) None
9. Consider the following statements:
Statement-I: The Su preme Court of
In dia has h eld i n some judgements
that t he reservat ion po l icies made
u nder Article 16(4) of the Constitution
of Ind ia wou ld be li mited by Article
335 for maintenance of efficiency of
admin istration.
Statement-II : Article 335 of the Const itution of India defines the term
'efficiency of admin istration '.
Wh ich one of the fo ll owing is correct in
respect of the above statements?

(a) Both Statement-I and Statemen t-II are
correct and Statement-U is the correct explanatio n for Statement-I
(b) Both Statement-I and Statement-II are
co rrect and Statement- L1 is not the
correct expla nation for Statemen t-l
(c) St<1tement-1 is correct but Statemcnt-II
is in correct
(d) Statement-I is incorrect but Statement-II
is correct
10. By which one of the followi ng Acts was
(he Governor General of Benga l des ignated as the Governor General of India?
(a) The Regu lati ng Act
(b) The Pitt's Ind ia Act.
(e) The Charter Act of 1793
(d) The Charter Act of 1833
11 . Consider the fo ll owing statements:
1. Accord ing to the Constitution of India,
the Centra l Government has a duty
to protect States from interna l disturbances.
2. The Constitution of India exempts the
States from providing legal counsel
to a perso n being h eld fo r preve n tive
detentio n .
3. Accord in g to the Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2002, co n fess ion of the
accused before the police cannot be
used as ev idence.
How ma ny of the above statements are
correct?
(a) On ly one
(b) On ly two
(e) All three
(d) None
12. Consider the followi ng statements in
respect of election to the Preside nt of India:
1. The membe rs nom inated to either
House of the Pa rli ame n t or the Legislative Assembli es of States are also
eligible to be included in the Electoral College.
Z. Higher the n umber of elcctive Assemb ly seats, higher is the value of vote
of each MLA of t hat State.
3. The value of vote of each MLA of
Madhya Pradesh is greater than that
of Kera la.
4. The value of vote of eac h MLA of
Puducherry is higher t ha n that of

J

UPSC Questions on Indian Polity (General Studies-Pre/ims 20/3-2023

Aru"n achal Pradesh because the ratio
of total population to total number of
elective seats in Puducherry is greater
as compared to Arunachal Pradesh.
How many of the above statements are
correct?
Ca) Only one
(b) Only two
Cc) Only three
Cd) All four
13. Consider the following statements in
respect of the National Flag of India
according to the Flag Code ofIndia, 2002:
Statement-I: One of the standard sizes of
the National Flag of India is 600 mm x
400 mm.
Statement-II: The ratio of the length
to the height (width) of the Flag shall
be 3,2.
Which one of the fo11owing is correct in
respect of the above statements?
(a) Both Statement-I and Statement-II are
correct and Statement-II is the correct explanation for Statement-I
(b) Both Statement-I and Statement-II are
" correct and Statement-II is not the
correct explanation for Statement-}
(e) Statement-} is correct but Statement-II
is incorrect
(d) Statement-I is incorrect but
Statement-II is correct
14. Consider the following statements in
respect of the Constitution Day:
Statement-I: The Constitution Day is
celebrated on 26th November every
year to promote constitutional values
among citizens.
Statement-II: On 26th November,
1949, the Constituent Assembly of
India set up a Drafting Committee
under the Chairmanship of Dr. B. R.
Ambedkar to prepare a Draft Constitution of India.
Which one of the fol1owing is correct in
respect of the above statements?
(a) Both Statement-l and Statement-II
are correct and Statement-II is the
correct explanation for Statement-I
(b) Both Statement-! and Statement-II are
correct and Statement-II is not the
correct explanation for Statement-I

767

(C) . Statement-I is correct but Statement-II
is incorrect
(d) Statement-I is incorrect but Statement-II
is correct
15. With reference to Home Guards, consider
the following statemen-ts:
1. Home Guards are raised under the
Home Guards Act and Rules of the
Central Government.
2. The role of the Home Guards is to serve
j

as an auxiliary force to the police in
maintenance of internal security.
3. 1b prevent infiltration on the international border/ coastal areas, the

Border Wing Home Guards Battalions
have been raised in some S"tates.
How many of the above statements are
correct?
Ca) Only one
(b) Only two
Cc) All three
Cd) None
16. With reference to India, consider the following pairs:

Action
1. Unauthorized

wearing of
police or
military
uniforms
2. Knowingly
misleading or
otherwise interfering with a
police officer or
military officer
when engaged in
their duties
3. Celebratory
gunfire which
can endanger
the personal
safety of others

The Act· under
which it is covered
The Official
Secrets Act, 1923

The Indian
Evidence Act, 1872

The Arms
(Amendment)
Act, 2019

How many of the above pairs are correctly
matched?
(b) Only two
Ca) Only one
Cc) All three
Cd) None

768

k'"

Indian Polity

ANSWERS
2013 TEST PAPER
I.b
2. b
3. a
13. C
11 . a
12. c

4. b

5. b

6. b

7. c

8. d

9. b

10. c

14. d

15. C

16. d

17. d

18. c

2014 TEST PAPER
2. b
3. d
I. C
11 . c
12. c
13. b

4. d

5. b

6. C

7. C

8. b

9. b

10. a

2015 TEST PAPER
I. C
2. b
3. b
II . d
12. d
13. C

4. a

5. d

6. d

7. a

8. C

9. d

10. a

14. b

15. d

2016 TEST PAPER
I. b
2. d
3. b

4. d

5. b

6. d

4. C

5. d

6. a

7. b

8. d

9. C

10. d

14. d

15. b

16. d

17. d

18. C

19. C

20. a

4. a

5. C

6. b

7. a

8. b

9. a

10. b

14. b

15. C

4. b

5. a

6. d

7. b

8. C

9. C

10. a

14. a

15 . b

4. d

5. b

6. d

7. d

8. d

9. a

10. b

14. d

15. d

16. d

17. d

18. c

4. C

5. b

6. b

7. d

8. a

9. a

10. a

14. b

15. b

16. b

17. d

18. d

2022 TEST PAPER
I. b
2. b
3. b
II. a

4. b

S. b

6. b

7. d

8. C

9. a

10. c

2023 TEST PAPER
1. a
2. a
3. C
II . b
12. a
13. d

4. a

5. a

6. d

7. a

8. b

9. C

10. d

14. c

15. b

16. b

2017 TEST PAPER
I.b
2. a
3. C
11. c
12. d
13. b
21. a
22. a
2018 TEST PAPER
l. b
2. d
3. C
II. b
12. c
13. b
2019 TEST PAPER
I.b
2. b
3. b
n. a
12. d
13. a
2020 TEST PAPER
l.b
2. b
3. d
n. a
12. d
13. a
2021 TEST PAPER
I. b
2. c
3. b
11. c
12. a
13. d

,,

\

Practice Questions on Indian Polity
(General Studies-Prelims)
1. The Speaker of Lok Sabha is not the
ch airman of which of the fo ll owi n g
committees?
(a) Business Advisory Committee
(h) Rules Committee
( c) Estimates Committee
(d) General Purposes Committee
2. Which of the fonowing is not a fo rmally
prescribed device ava ilable to the mem·
bers of Parliament?
(a) Question Hour
(h) Zero Hour
( c) Half-an-hour discussion
(d) Short du ration discussion
3 . Wh ich of the following is exclusively a
committee of the Lower House?
(a) Committee on Assurances
(h) Committee on Delegated Legislation
(c) Committee on Public Un dertakings
(d) Estimates Committee
4. Which one of the fo llowing devices calls
the attention of minister towards a matter of public importance?
(a) Half-an-hour discu ssion
(b) Calling attention notice
(c) Short duration discussion
(d) Adjournment motion
5. Central Vigilance Com mission was set up
on the recommendation of:
(a) First Administrative Reforms Commission of India
(h) Gorwala Report
(c) Kripalani Committee
(d) Santhanam Committee

6. The in stitution of Lokayukta was created
for the first time by the state of:
(a) Orissa
(h) Bihar
(c) Punjab
(d) Maharash tra
7. The correct statements about zero hour
includes:
1. It is the first hour of every sitting in
both the houses of Parliament.
2. It is mentioned in the Rules of Business of the h ouses of Parliament.
3. During this time, matters of urgent
public importance are raised.
4. It is the ti me immediately following
the Question Hour in both th e houses
of Parliament.
5. It is an Indian innovation in parliamentary procedure since 1964.
(a) 2,3 an d 4 (h) 3 an d 4
(c) 1,2andS (d) 2, 3 an d 5
8. The correct statements abou t calli n g
attention notice are:
I. It is a device of calling the attention
of a minister to a matter of urgent
public importance.
2. Its main purpose is to seek an authoritative statement from the minister.
3. It does not involve any censure
against government.
4. It is an Indian innovation in th e
parliamen tary procedure since 1952.
5 . It is not mentioned in th e Ru les of
Busin ess and Procedure.
(a) 1, 2, 3 and 4 (h) 4 an d 5
(c) I , 2, 3 and 5 (d) 1,2 and 3

770
9. Whi ch of the fo limvin g sta te me nts a re
true df Adjou rnm en t Mot id n'l
J. If is ali ex tra ordi na ry p rocedu re
vi h icH sets aside t he riormal bu siness of the Ho use.
2. Its ma in object is to drmv the attenti o n of t he House to' a rece nt malte r
of urgent public impo rtance.
3. T he Rajya Sabha ca n ma ke use of til is
procedure.
4. It must be supported by not less tha n
50 me mbe rs for in trodu cti o n .
5. It in vo lves a n e le me nt of ce n sure
aga in st govern me n t.
(a) 1,2,4a nd 5 (b) 2,3a nd 5
[c) 2,3 al1d 4
(d) J, 2and 4
10. Whicll of the fdilO\virig statements a re
in correc t about the di ffe re nce betwee n
th e wri t j uri sd icti o n of t he Su pre me
Co u rt a nd hi gh courts in Indi a?
1. T h e Sup re me Co u rt ca n issue wr its
no t only for the pu rpose of e n fo rcem e n t of Funda m e nta l Rights but
also for a rly other pu rpose, whe reas
h igh co urts ca n issue writs o nl y
fo r the pu rpose of e nforcement of
Fu nda me ntal Ri ghts.
2 . HigH courts can iss ue t He writ of
Inj un cti on , wh ereas th e Sup re me
Co urt ca n not iss ue t h e writ of
Inj un ct ion .
3. T he Supre me Court carl issue WT itS
o n iy in the case of a ppea l, wh e reas
high cou rts can issue l'Vrits o nl y
wH e n the party directly a pproaches
it.
4 . HigH courtS ca rl issue writs h ot o nly
fo r tH e purPose of enfo rceme nt of
Funda me ntal Rights but al so for
an y dth e r pu rpose, wh ereas th e
Sup rc n:ie CoU rt ca n issue wTits only
fo r the purpose of e nfo rcem e nt of
Fu n da m e n tai RigHts.
(a) I a nd 2
(b) 1,2 o nd j
(c) 2 'hi d 3
(d) 4 o nl y

~--

n . No-confi derlce Motio n, to be a dmi tted in

the Lok Sabha, n eeds t he support of:
(a) 80 Members
(b) 140 Membe rs
(c) 160 Me mbe rs (d) 50 Mombers
12. Wh ich of th e following state me nts are
in cd rrect abou t un sta rred qu esti o n?
]. It is distingui shed by ao aster isk
ma rk.
2 . Answer to suc h a questi011 is give n
ora ll y.
3. Answer to such a qu estion is not fo llowed by suppl e me nta ry questio ns.
4 . It does not ca rry a n asteri sk mark.
5 . Answe r to suc h a qu estion is g ive n
i n a wr itte n for m .
(a) 2 a nd 3
(b) 3, 4 a n d 5
(c) I a nd 2
(d ) 2,3 a nd 4

STATEMENT-I AND
STATEMENT-II PATTERN
Answer t he foll owi ng qu esti o ns by us in g the
codes give n be low.
(a) Both Sta te me n t- I and State me nt-II a re
correct a nd State me n t- II is the correct
ex pl a natio n fo r Statemen t-I
(b) Both Statemen t-I a nd Stateme nt-II are co rrect and Sta te me nt-II is not th e oo rre ct
ex plan ati d n fdr Sta te me nt-!
(c) Sta te ll1 e n t- l is co rrect but Sta te me nt·1I is
in co r rect
(d) Stateme nt- J is in co rrect but State me n t-Ii
is co rrect
13. Stale m e nt·l , The wr it jurisdic tion of th e
Sup re me Co urt and hi gH courts in Indi a
is sa me.
State me n t- II : Both , th e Suprem e Cou.rt
a nd th e High Court ca n issue th e wri ts
of Ha beas Corpus, Ma nda mus, Proh ib ition, Cc rtio ra ri a nd Quo warranto.
14. Statem e nt-I: In de moc ra cy, the ultimate
responsibility of admini stra tion is to the
people.
Statement-II: The de mocratic governme nt
is ba sed o n th e prin ci pl e of p o pu la r
sovc re ig 11 ty.

t MATCHING PATTERN
.:.

Practice Questions on Indian Pol'

General Studies-Prelims

771

Match List-I with List-II and select correct answer by using the codes given below the lists.
List-I (Writs)
List-II (Literal meanings)
15.
A. Mandamus
1. 'By what warrant or authority'
B. Habeas Corpus
2. 'We command'
C. Quo warranto
3. 'Th be certified'
D. Certiorari
4. 'You may have the body' or '1b have the body or
Codes,
A
B
C
D
(a)
2
3
4
1
(b)
2
4
3
1
(c)
1
4
2
3
(d)
2
4
1
3
16.
List-I
List-II
(Provisions)
(Contained in)
1. Article 13
A. Writ jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
2 . Article 226
B. Suits against government
3. Article 300
C. Writ jurisdiction of the High Court
D. Source of the power of judicial review
4. Article 32
S. Article 166
B
D
A
C
Codes:
(a)
4
3
5
1
·2
(b)
3
4
5
(c)
2
4
1
3
(d)
2
5
4
3
17. The final work of UPSC in recruitment
process is:
(a) Selection
(b) Appointment
( c) Certification (d) Placement
18. The conditions of service of members of
All-India Services are determined by:
(al President of India
(b} Constitution of India
( c) Parliament of India
(d) Union Public Service Commission

ASSERTION (A) AND REASON (R)
PATTERN
Answer the following questions by using the
following codes.
(a) Both A and Rare true and R is the correct
explanation of A.
(b) Both A and R are true but R is not a correct explanation of A.

( c) A is true but R is false.
( d) A is false but R is true.
19. Assertion: India has imposed severe
restrictions on the political activities' of
civil servants.
Reason: The civil servants in India enjoy
the right to vote.
20. Assertion: A member of All-India Service
can appeal against the order of a State
Government to the President of India.
Reason: Article 311 of the Constitution
says that a civil servant cannot be
removed or dismissed by any authority
which is subordinate to the authority by
which he was appointed.
21. The Vote on Account is passed:
(a) After the voting of demands
(b) Before the general discussion
( c) After the general discussion
( d) Either after the voting of the demands
or after the general discussion.

172 ,~ Indian Polity
22. Arran ge the following stages in the e nact-

me nt of budge t in prope r order:
]. Gener al discus sion
2. Appro priati on Bi]]
3. Finan ce Bill
4. Voting of the dema nds for grant
5. Prese ntatio n to legi slatur e
(a) 1, 2,3,4 ,5 (b) 5, I, 4, 2, 3
(e) 5, 1, 4, 3,2 (d) 5, 1,3,4 ,2
23. Which of the follow ing docum ents a re
presen ted to the parlia ment along with
the budge t?
1. Key to budge t docum e nts
2. Dema nds for grants
3. Fiscal policy strate gy statem ent
4. Finan ce Bill
5. Econo mic Surve y
(b) 1, 2 and 3
(a) 1, 3 a nd 5
(d) 1, 2, 3a nd4
(e) 2,3a nd 5
24. Which of the foHowing is not a co nditi on
of admi ssibili ty of cut motio ns in the
Parlia me nt?
(a) It sho uld not make sugge stio ns for
the a mend m e nt of existi ng laws.
(b) It should not re late to expen diture
charg ed on the Co nsolidated Fund
of India.
ec) It should rela te to more than one
deman d.
(d) It shoul d not raise a questi on of
privile ge.
25. The ultima te respon sibility of taking due
action on the comm ents of the CAG vests
with:
(a) Presid ent of India
(b) Supre m e Court
(e) Parlia ment
(d) Natio nal Devel opmen t Coun cil
26. The word 'Budge t' is menti oned in which
ofthe follow ing Arti cles of the Con stitution of India ?
(b) Art. 112
(a) Art. 266
(d) None
(e) Art. 265
ing statem ents are
fo11ow
the
of
27. Which
incorr ect?
1. Rajya Sa bha ca n rejec t a Mone y

Bill.

2. Rajya Sabha can make recom menda tions on a Mo n ey Bill.
3. Rajya Sabh a canno t reject a Mone y
Bill.
4 . Rajya Sab h a shou ld return the
Mon ey 8ilJ to the Lok Sabha within
14 days.
5. R.:1jya Sabha can a me nd a Mone y

Bill.
3 a nd 4 (b) I, 2 and 5
2,
(a)
(d) on ly 1
(e) 1 and 5
28. Whi ch of the follow ing expen diture s are
c harge d upon the Conso lidate d Fund of
India ?
1. Allow ances of the Chair m an of
Rajya Sabha .
2. Expen diture relatin g to the raisin g
of loans an d t h e serv ice and
rede mptio n of debt.
3 . Pe n s io ns of the judge s o f Hi gh
Co urts.
4. Any sum requir ed to satisfy the award
of any arbitr ation tribun al.
5. Admin istrati ve expen ses of the office
of the Comp troll er and Audit orGene ral
(b) 1, 2 a nd 5
(a) 2 and 5
(e) 2, 3 a nd 4 (d) 1,2,3 ,4 a nd 5
29. The co rrec t state m e nts about Publi c
Accou nt of India are:
1. The public accou nt is the fu nd to
which a U public mon eys rece ived
by or on beha lf of the gover n me nt
a re credit ed .
2. No legis lative ap pro priati on is
requi red for pay me nts from the
Public Accou nt of Indi a.
3. Legislative appro priatio n is requir ed
for paym e nt s from t h e Publi c
Accou nt of India.
4. All publi c money s, other tha n those
credit ed to the Con so lidate d Fund
of Indi a, whi c h are rece ived by or
on beha lf of the gove rnm e nt are
c red ited to th e Public Acco unt of
India.

Practice Questions on Indian Pof

,,

5. It is operated by executive action.
Ca) 1,2 and 5 (b) 1, 3 and 5
Ce) 2, 4 and 5 Cd) 2 and 4
30. Which of the following statements are
incorrect?
1. Appropriation Bill cannot be
amended while the Finance Bill
can be amended.
2. Finance Bill cannot be amended
while Appropriation Bill can be
amended.

General Studies-Prefims

773

3. Same procedure governs both the

Appropriation Bill and the Finance
Bill.
4. Appropriation Bill and the Finance
Bill are governed by different pro-

cedures.

5. Appropriation Bill cannot be rejected
by the Rajya Sabha while Finance
Bill can be rejected by it.
Ca) 2 and 4
(b) 2, 4 and 5
Ce) 1 and 3
Cd) 1, 3 and 5

~ MATCHING PATTERN
Ma tch List-I with List·II and select the correct answer by using the codes given below the lists.
31 .
List-! (Cut Motions)
List-II (Implications)
A. lbken Cut Motion
1. "That the amount of the demand be reduced by a
specified amount."
B. Economy Cut Motion
2. "That the amount ofthe demand be reduced by ~l."
C. Policy Cut Motion
3. "That the amount of the demand be reduced by ~IOO."
4. "That the amount of the demand be reduced to t'l."
5. "That the amount of the demand be reduced to 'tlOO."
Codes:
A
B
C
1
2
Ca)
5
(b)
5
3
1
1
4
Ce)
3
3
5
2
Cd)
32.
List·1 perms)
List-II (Defined by)
A . Consolidated Fund of India 1. Article no
B. Money Bill
2. Article 267
C. Annual Financial Statement 3. Article 266
D. Contingency Fund of India 4. Article 265
5. Article 112
A
D
Codes:
B
C
4
1
5
Ca)
3
(b)
2
1
4
5
(e)
2
4
1
5
(d)
3
1
2
5

STATEMENT-I AND
STATEMENT-II PATTERN
Answer the following questions by using the
codes given below.
(a) Both Statement-I and Statement-II are
correct and Statement-II is the correct
explanation for Statement-I

(b) Both Statement·I and Statement.II are cor·
rect and Statement-II is not the correct
explanation for Statement·I
(e) Statement-I is correct but Statement-II is
incorrect
(d) Statement-I is incorrect but Statement-II
is correct

l

774

,r(i Indian Polity

33. Statement I: The budget makes a di stinction between the expenditure 'ch arged'
on the Co n solidated Fund of lndia and
the exp enditure 'made' from the Consolidated Fund of India.
Statement U: Th e ex penditure 'cha rged'
on the Consolidated Fu nd ofI ndia is not
su bj ect to the vote of Pa rliam ent.
34 . Statement I: No expendit ure can be
in curred without the approva l of the
Parliament.
Statement II: Our democratic government,
li ke that of Britain, is based on the co ncept of sovere ignty of the parliament.
35. State ment I: The Rajya Sabha has less
powers in financial matters.
Statement H: The Lok Sabha alo ne votes
th e demands for grants.
36. Statement I: The expe nditu re 'charged' on
the Con solidated Fund of Indi a is not
subj ect to the vote of Parliament.
Statement U: It is in the nature of obligatory payment.
37. Th e Finance Co mmi ss io n does not
recommend on:
(a) The distribution of n et p roceeds of
taxes between the union a nd the
states.
(b) The prin ci ples to be fo llowed by the
centre while givin g grants- in-a id to
th e states out of the co n solidated
Fund of Indi a.
(e) The amount of money to be allocated
to the states from Publi c Accou nt of
India.
(d) Any oth er matter refe rred to th e
Co mmission by President in the
interest of soun d finance.
38. Which of the fo ll owing statements about
President's ordinan ce-making power is
not correct?
(a) It is co-extens ive with legislative
power of Parliament.
(b) Laid down in Artic1e 123.
(e) Sh all cease to operate o n ex piry of
six weeks from the reassemb ly of
the Parliame nt.
(d) Cannot be withdrawn at any time by
the President.

39. The salien t features of the Government of
Indi a Act, 1935 are:
1. All-I nd ia Federa ti o n
2. Provi ncial Auto nomy
3. Dyarchy at the Cen tre
4. Aboli tion of Dyarchy in the pf(Winces
(a) I and 2
(b) I , Z and 3
(e) 2, 3 and 4
(d) 1,2, 3 a nd 4
40. The accounts of the Union and of the
States sha ll be kept in such for m as
prescribed by:
(a) Finance Minister of Indi a in con·
sultation with CAG of India.
(b) CAG of Indi a with the approva l of
NIT! Aayog.
(e) CAG of India with the approval of the
President.
(d) President of India in co usu ltation
with CAG of India
4]. Which of the fo llowing acts introduced
th e principle of election in India ?
(a) Indian Co un cils Act of 1861
(1)) Indian Co un cils Act of 1892
(e) Indi an Cou ncils Act of 1909
(d) Indjan Co un cils Act of 1919
42. The features of Indian federal system a re:
l. Division of powers
2. Separation of powers
3 . Inde pende n t judiciary
4. Leadership of the Prime Min ister
5. A wTitten Co n stitution
(a) 2,3and 5
(b) 1,4a nd 5
(e) 1,2 and 5 (d) 1,3 and 5
43. Which of the following is not co rrect
about Fi nance Commissio n ?
(a) Constituted at the expiration of every
fifth year.
(b) Recommends the distribution of proceeds of taxes between Centre and
states.
(e) Co nsists of a Ch a irma n and fOLlr
other members.
(d) Its advice i s bindiug o n the
Governm ent.
44 . Which of th e fo n ow in g is co rrectly
matched?
(a) 1909 Act - Principle of ejectio n
(b) 19] 9 Act
Provincial au tonomy

(c) i!1.~§ AM ~ P¥N§n¥ in P!!!yj/),~~.s
(d) i~47 4M ."\l.~.s!,gmi!l!§
gOY~fnm§pt

45. ·T))e /3AG pfjwlja g./) 1m .r,efflpy~.d ffPffl
tile (iffice @/)/»' j!) !i1;~ m.~!!!!.e .r !!}J,Q @/)
H.~~ :uo~fl..d§ P.§.:
(a) /3n~im)!l1! (if ~1l-e MP§§

(b) ~UJ'f&ffle §II1l!! iI!M!.$e
(c) fUl:9!ll.."r G~mr!!l (if Iml#!
(d) §1!1!!!~~r gf /,,9); MiQ!,
46. ,sgWto!¥ ~~g'lj#,9n /II #I.e pi!r/f91~0 §y~
~em (Wai i!P§9~4~.\l 1m
'
.
(a) in!!ian /3P!1:"cj!:s AU Iln1l9Z
(b) [nd!.a!) §II!1:II§i:J.s IWt I!fWlJ
(c) :lP.dii!n C9!!1l.cj\, .I)..ot gf W.fiJ
(d) p\di a!) &,Q1l/l..9i/s Act 1If111~~
47. p,¥,apoIW w.a.s illtro.cl!!§!'ft t>y;;
(a) ~ncji;!n /391l.n,vi!§ Alit gH!)9,~
(b) N.oy,ermm!M I!fI!)lIj!l .I).~ @fl!i1!!
(c) ,G pvem))lent gf !nQi• .I).~ pf ~II,3.~
(d) ~nft~!,~.lIg~!)£.!;' A9t gf W~7
48. 'W",!,cj;l gf ~~ w~l!@wil1g i§ NI~ ,a
i.e.at,u te gf IJ.9Yl;mml!})$ gf 1nft!.• .4..o.t .9,f
1]..93,5?

(a) p .:r.a I'f);ly !!t #J.e ~I!,!f&
(b) .A1lHnftja fl'.d.e.~~1!
(c) fJI:9Y.ip..9.ie1l iJP$PA.QJnY
(d) D~a~c)ty i n ,tJ:t~ wmril!AAs
49. 'Wllic,h ,o.ne .of \~Q.e f.9Jt19wing ,affl~/l..d·
mepts ,t.o ,t.I:>.o I>oQs!!i.'U.~9!1, ;1'9.<
~t
i
tt:;1)le, ,m~de ii! \obJig~g.r~ f91 ~ rf&§),g.e.n.t ,\9 "W P!1 #i.e ~9.vti..~ gf ~I!.e WYP.&i!

m.e

pf ,rq.im.s.t~.r§.?

(a) ;z~.tJ:t i!ffl.!'!.lPme.w
,( b) 42n.d ,afQ!'I1d.~!)t
(c) .Mj(l;I i!fQ~I!.cJm.e»,t
(d) S4,ll\l ;a.rJ;l.e}).!!.J))~.1),t

50. 'Jl'/:le ~}).cjj!m j(!\9!'.~",tj,0}) i§ I!>.a§.eg pp. \W.e
lPa,tt;em g(;

(a) :~w,i$J&;1'~a».4 (b) \U.M
(c) !Il.~,~s)a
(d) \<;;~!1i!,9~
51. ~'JJ..O :~!,1.)9 ttb~ .1'mc;IJ,o':l.n @P..$#.t.I:l~P!} 1~.§.tatJ­
llis.he,d ,3 lUJ):iW-Y IS.@~~ \lri.JJ.t ~J,lP.$).d.i.~r,y
ie.<!.exa) f""Jil!;!;e§'~t/:l!', ,W,Ml f.!',<!.e};~) ~!¥,i.e
\~'ii..t,h 'S.J,l.QSj.9j.~)W I!l.noi~m {~t.u~§!'?

(a) t!>~a.Rv,i,l~.!'·A~§Jii.J;l (b) ~xo!, ,;J.e.I).lJ,j!),g~
(c) ~.R, .1).,W~,e,dl;~l
(d) ~q;:,. WiI;1.~.a,rc~

52. 'W/)if)1 Bf I'M fQllewil1/l ilf,e m/f S9!fl'&!
.a~!'M 1J. of !m~m?
L H,q i§ e/!/!!!!f!..~9 p.,Y m~ l'f,c§iMm ('If
i} P~(~9.d ef fJ.v@ "!~~,,~:
2. HiH!!I.a lf !m,1l §i!ooifi9l!H!f.~pfl'if~
ilm 9~Wrffli!)~iI P.,¥ /lrl!§i..d~n!,
3. ff~ ~.l)~Jl ¥t191,te p.ffi€-§ en .a~jnjn.~

.w

t)1~ ~g~ Bf §g ¥I!!!~~.

4. :~ 9!l:Q p.ef!'Iiwy~!!,Y m.~ P~iil!<1)t
P.T! h~mm.·
5. /1.e j.~ f!;§I'!/I!§!!?)(; (sr m.•im!!il!il!/l
~ e.~9!m!§ IIf @!;I!Uill iloo §,U!~
1""YMl!m~lkt§,

(a) '1, ~ ~!)i1 §

(b) ~, i) ,~OO ~
(d) il, ~ ilI!..4 §

(c) }, ~, ;3, 41/OO .1i
53. 'Wni§)1 Bf #II; f9!lImifill iI"~ ~".!'SU9.9N
'1I!§e-,0)li!il1'.er§.91! Bf ~ff! M.~,9P
). H.~ i§ i!/?I'.Qifl~eft
~ rr!!§i.4~m,
2. ffl; .e!1j.9~§ #!.e Milli!§ Bf i! §aPill.~.t.
f.ap'~ mf"Qi.s,t.~.r:.
3. tWiM ml!m.1JM Bf#ll; !ifli911@birW,
4. ~~ ,~t!.e.l).4s ~iI!?ille! mI!.!'JiiI'.gs ,a s ,~

p.¥

§p!<!!i!!l !!)rn!!!!,

5. !M i.§mS ,g~{~MIII!Kew.ti)\~ r~a.cj lif

#II; ~m .4~y',9ll·
(a) 1, ~, .1 ,~1l.4 § (b) i?, ;~, -1 ,a mB
(c) ,2" 4 a,R4 §
(d) 1, ~, ;~ .app. §
54. 'I1>.e Of>ff.!'!!.t§!i!!I!.IMIli§ i!9.9!!! ,t#,e/ilW;!"tj,Xe
rfi.l)..o~pi.e,s pf :~!i!~ rp!~~y i!l!?:
). 'WI!.~y .ar.!' ~9l{.9W@9 {{.9)P. @:le l.r~~1;I
~.9,I,i§!!iMi!},Q·
2. of!!c,Y ,a.r,e i!1..C,9~9"-"'~ 1:1) f.~.r:! '¥ (J,f
(!he ~,Q~.~w..tjpl)..
3. 'They ".!'.~1< ~9 jl?,lil>n"dS §9!'iN ,;u:t,d .~oo·
_nop1~_~ 19.~.~ Ws,§r!W£-!,.a.c;.Y,.
4. ':)]1e ,sta.Wm.~.~t w.wpl!l,;;9'm,YI.wp},e.
,rn.!'})~ Mi&.w.

5. .#.1 pr@,.!'.I)I.!'!i\'&e!1.cI)).\'!iI) in ,na!u!:e.
(a) ~,~, ~el)g § (b) ~, ;~i':I).d §
(c) a.. 3,,4 ,aJ,l9 § (d) ~ ,~.I),~ :~
55. Tih.e \Goyem ,oI·§ ,e!1.eT.?! pf !\e.l\~?) 1\>,~""J.1:l,e
ti'.M \G.91W:,Q9!-§.!'p'&.r~ ,9,f ~1).4i.? I\>)'!
(a) {?9y&,r,Q:J:Q..!',W pf i1.Rd?~ .4!"t pf M~~
,(b) ~n.4i.'!iI) ,<':.9J!i1.1W§ Ali! ,'If W§}
(c) :PAt,~ W.d,i.? k.!'~(Jn7.~~
(d) @.I.I.a.r.\l'I .d "!uf jlglJJ
56. \WiI};i,~j;I i.;; ip.wm;l<~ly :W.~!9.Qg4?

(a) iPW;QjJJ;i,.t,i<;>}) ()f i!ili§SOOi!.'e,t,io,Q,~Gl.!'~.9

776 ;

Indian Polity

(b) Right to Associa tion-Article 19.

(c) Right to Protection of Life-Article 20.
(d) Ri ght to Constitu tio nal Re medi es Article 32.
57. Who c harac t e ri se s Indian U ni o n
as ~a fede ration with a ce ntrali sin g
te nde n cy"?
(a) B.R. Ambedkar
(b) K.C. Wheare
(c) Ivor Jennings
(d) Granville Au stin
58. Whi ch ac t provided for direct control of
Indi a n affairs by th e British Government?
(a) Cha rtcr Act of 1858
(b) Regulating Act of 1773
(c) Pitts India Act of 1784
(d) Cha rte r Act of 1833
59 . The correct state me nts about Fundamenta l Rights are:
1. They a re e nfo rceabl e in the court of
law.
2. T hese r ights a re absolute.
3 . Th ey ca n be su sp e nded during
nationa l e me rge n cy, except some.
4. Th ey a re avai lable onl y to Indi a n
citizen s.
5. Th ey a re contained in Part IV of the
Con stitution.
(a) 1, 3, 4and5 (b) 1, 2,3 and5
(c) I and 3
(d) I, 3 and 5
60. The words 'socialist' and 'secular' we re
added to the Preamble by:
(a) 41st ame ndm e nt
(b) 44th am endm en t
ec) 46th a mendm e nt
(d) 42nd a me ndment
61. No de ma nd for a grant is to be made
except on the recomm endation of:
(a) Prim e Mini ste r
(b) Presid ent
(e) Finan ce Ministe r
(d) Co mptrolle r and Auditor-Genera l
62. The fea tures of Government of India Act
of 1858 includes:
1. Replacement of Company rule by the
Crown rule.
2. Establishme nt of a Board of Control
over the Court of Directo rs.

3. Esta blishm e nt of a Counci l of India.
4 . Separa ting the leg islative a nd executi ve fun ct io ns of th e Gove rn o rGe ne ra l.
5. Creatio n of a new office of th e Secreta ry of Sta te for India .
(a) 1,3a nd4 (b) 1, 2 a nd 4
(e) I a nd 5
(d) 1,3 and 5
63. Whi c h of th e foll owin g are not th e
fede ra l featu res of I ndia n Con stitution ?
1. Supre macy of Con stitution
2 . All-India services
3. Singl e citi ze nship
4. Indep endent judiciary
5 . Bica me ral legi sla tu re
6. Integrated judicia ry
(a) 1,4 a nd 5 (b) 1, 5and6
(c) 2,3 a nd 6 (d) 2, 3 and 4
64 . The fea tures of Indi a n parlia me ntary
syste m are:
1. Inde pe nde nt judic ia ry.
2. Coll ective responsibility of the executive to the legi sla ture.
3. A wr itte n Co nsti tution .
4. Prese nce of dc-jure a nd de-factO
exec uti ves.
5. Doubl e me mbe rship of mini ste rs
(a) 2, 3 and 4
(b) 1,2 and 4
(c) 2, 4 and 5
(d) I, 2, 4 and 5
65. Th e Pres ide nt of India is elected by a n
e lectoral co ll ege cons isting of:
(a) I'\lle mbe rs of Parliament a nd sta te
legi sla tures
(b) El ected me mbe rs of Parliame nt a nd
sta te legislatures
(c) Elected me mbers of Parliame nt a n d
sta te leg islative asse mblies
(d) Elected me mbers of Lok Sabha and
membe rs of Raj ya Sabha and state
Legi slati ve Assemblies
66. Whi ch of th e foll owing acts laid th e
foundation of Central administra tion ?
(a) Charter Act of 1833
(b) Regulating Act of 1773
(c) Charte r Act of 1853
(d) Pitts In dia Ac t of 1784

p,CJdjce uestions on Indian Pol'

,

lim

777

l MATCHING PATTERN
Match List I with List II and select the co rrect answers by using codes given below th e lists.
6 7.

List·1 (Features)
A. Bicam e ral syste m
B. Legislative devoluti on
C. Separate e lecto rate
D. Provi ncial autonomy
Codes:

68 .

5. Minto-Morely Reforms.
C
D

5

B
2

4

5

(d)

5

4

3

(a)

(b)
(c)

(d)

3
3

2

A
4
3
4
4

5

B

C

3
4

I

2
I

I
I
I

3

I

List-II (Co ntained in)
I. Article 29

2. Article 21
3. Article 23
4. Article 16
S. Article 25

2
I
2

D

2
I

3
3

Li sHI (Typ es of Veto)

List-I (Implications)
A. Withholding of assent
B. Overridden by an ordinary maj ority
C. Thking no action on the biB
D. Overriden by a higher maj o rity
Codes:

(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)

70.

3. Mo ntagu-Chelmsford Reforms
4. Indi an Council s Act of 1892

List·1 (Righ ts)
A. Equality in public e mployme nt
B. Minorities rights
C. Right to pe rsonal liberty
D. Right against ex ploitation
Codes:

69.

A

List·!! (Acts/ Reform s)

1. Governm ent of India Act of 1935
2. Indi an Coun cil s Act of 1861

(a)

(b)
(c)

I

n, ,

A
3

4
5

3

B
5
3
3
4

List·1 (Schedules)
A. Third Schedule
B. Ninth Schedu le
C. Fourth Schedul e
D. Thnth Schedul e
Codes:

(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)

A
I

5
5

I

1. Qualified veto

C

D

2

I
5
2

2
I
2

I

List-II (Provisions)
Allocation of seats in Upper House
2. Disqualification on grounds of defection
3. Validation of certain acts
4. Languages
5. Fo rm s of affirma tion s

I.

B

C

D

3

4

2
2

3
4
4

2. Pocket veto
3. Absolute veto
4. Suspensive veto
S. Majority veto

I

2

2

I

3

778 ,~ Indian Polity

j

ASSERTION (A) AND REASON (R)
PATTERN

Answe r the fo ll owing qu estion s by usi ng the
codes given below.
(a) Both A and R are tru e and R is the co rrect
exp la nat ion of A.
(b) Both A and R a re t rue but R is not a correct exp lanatio n of A.
(e) A is true but R is fal se.
(d) A is fal se but R is truc.
71. Assertio n: In dia ha s adoptcd the parli am e ntary form of government.
Reason: The President is the t itu lar head
of the state while the co un c il of ministers headed by th e Prim e Minister is the
real execut ive authority.
72. Asse rt ion: A person who holds, o r who
ha s held, office as Pres iden t shall not
be e l igible for re-e lection to that office.
Rea so n : No person shall be eli g ibl e fo r
e lection as a Pres id ent unl ess he is
qual ified for electio n a s a m e mber of
t he House of Peo pl e.
73. Assertion: All doubts and di sputes arising
o ut of or in co nnect ion wit h the election
of a Pres ident or Vice-Pres ident shall be
inquired into and decided by the Supreme
Co urt whose dec ision shall be final.
Rea so n: Parliam e nt m ay, by la w, regulate
any m atte r relat in g to or co nnected with
th e elect ion of a Presi de nt or a VicePresi de nt.
74. A new All-India Se rvice c.:1 n be crea ted by:
(a) A resolu tion of the Rajya Sa bha
(b) An act of Parliam e nt
(e) An orde r of th e Pres ide nt
(d) A reso lu tion of the UPSC
75. The Centra l Admi ni stra ti ve Tribunal dea ls
with :
(a) Recru itment matters
(b) Prom otio n matters
(e) Di sc iplinary matte rs
(d) Recruitment and a ll service matters
76. Who/ Which of the fo ll owi ng can provide
fo r the appo intm ent of a Jojnt Sta te
Publi c Service Com mi ss ion ?
(a) President of India
(b) Pa rli ament of India

(e) UPSC
(d) State Governors
77. Th e origi ns of UPSC ca n be traced to:
(a) 1909 Act
(b) 1919 Act
(e) 1935 Act
(d) J947 Ac t
78. T h e fu n c tion s of the UPSC C'1n be
extended by:
(a) Pres ide nt
(b) Prime Mini ster
(c) Ministry of Perso nn el
(d) Pa rli a m e nt
79. Th e personn el syste m of a ny loca l authority, corporate body or public inst itut io n
ca n be placed within the jurisd ict ion of
th e UPSC by,
(a) Presid e nt of Indi a
(b) Central Mini stry of Person ne l
(e) Parli ament
(d) Supreme Court
80. The Cha irm a n a nd m e mbers of the ursc
hold office for a ter m of:
(a) Three years (b) Fo ur yea rs
(c) Five years (d) Six yea rs
81 . Who is rega rded as t he "Fa ther of A.11-ln dia
Services"?
(a) Lord Maca ul ay
(b) Lord Co rnwalli s
(e) B.R. Ambedkar
(d) Sa rdar Pate l
82 . A Joint State Public Serv ice Com miss io n
ca n be c reated by:
(a) An order of the Pres ide nt
(b) A reso lu t io n of the Raj ya Sabha
(c) An act of Parli a ment
(d) A reso lu tio n of the co n cerned sta tc
leg islCltures
83. \""hich of th e followin g state ments a re
co rrect'?
1. The Co nst itution does not fix the
number of membe rs of the UPSC.
2. One-hal f of t he mem bers of the
u pse should be pe rso ns who h;wc
he ld office und er the Government
of India or of a sta te at least fOT
fi ve yea rs.
3 . T he Chairman and members of the
ursc h o ld office for a term of five
years or un ti l they attajn the age of
60 yea rs.

)

Practice Questians on Indian Polity (General Studies- Prelims)

4. The sa lari es a nd allowances of the
m emb ers of th e UPSC a re determined by the Parliament.
5. The e ntire expanses of UPSC are
charged on the Conso lidated Fund
of India .
(a) 2, 4 and 5 (b) 1 and 5
(e) 2,3and4 (d) 1,4 a ndS
84. Wbich of th e following statements related
to the Central Administrative Tribuna l
a re correct?
1. It is a statutory body.
2. Its m embers a re drawn from administrative background o nl y.
3. It is not bound by th e procedure prescribed in the code of civil procedure.
4. Itsjurisdiction covers the members of
All India Servi ces as we11 as Ce ntral
Se rvices a nd Central Government
posts.
(a) 1,2 and 3 (b) 1 and 4
(e) 1,3 and 4 (d) 2 and 3

STATEMENT-I AND
STATEMENT-II PATTERN
Answer th e fo11owing questions by usin g th e
codes given below
(a) Both Statement-J and Sta tement-II are
co rrect and Statem ent-II is the co rrect
exp lanation fo r Statement~I
(b) Both Statement-l and Statement-II are correct and Statement-II is not the co rrect
ex planation for Statement-)
(c) State ment-! is co rrect but Statement-II is
in co rrect
(d) Sta tem ent-! is incorrect but Statem ent-II
is correct
85 . Statement-I : All-India Services are instruments of n ational integratio n.
Statement-II : Its members are appointed
by President of India.
86. Statement-I : Chairman a nd members of
the UPSC are a ppOinted by President.
Statement-II: The UPSC is a constitutional
body.
87. Statement-I: The salari es of the me mbers
of the UPSC ca nnot be cha nged to their
disadva ntage during th eir tenure.

~ 779

Statement-II: The indep endence of the
Public Se rvice Commi ss ion ha s to be
maintained.
88. Stateme nt-I: The Co nst itution has not
fi xed the number of members of the
UPSC.

Statement-II: The Chairman and members
of the UPSC are appointed by Pres ident.
89. Which of th e following statements are
true about the Governor of a state?
1. The executive power of the sta te is
vested in him.
2. He must have attai ned 35 yea rs of
age.
3. He holds office during the pl easure
of the President.
4. The grounds for his removal are laid
down in the Co nstitution.
(a) 1,2, and 4 (b) 1, ·2 and 3
(e) 1, 3and4 (d) 1,2, 3 and4
90. The recommendations of the Ashok
Mehta Com mittee on Panchayati Raj are:
1. Creat ion of a two-tier system
2. Rese rva tion of seats for SCs and STh
3. Compulsory powers of taxa tion to
Panchayati Raj institutions
4. Official participation of politica l parties in Panchayati Raj affairs
5 . If superceded, elections must be held
within one year
(a) 1,3 a nd 4
(b) 1,2,4 and 5
(e) 1,2, 3 and 4 (d) 1,3,4 an d 5
91. District Judges are appointed by:
(a) The Chi ef Justice of High Court
(b) The State Public Service Commission
(c) The Chief Minister of state
(d) The Governor of state
92. Money bill ca n be introduced in the state
legislature only on the recommendation
or,
(a) Speaker
(b) Finance Minister
(c) Chief Minister
(d) Governor
93. According to the Balwa ntrai Mehta Committee, the District Collector should be:
(a) Kept out of th e Zila Parishad
(b) A non-voting member of the Zila
Parishad

780

,r'

Indian Polity

(c) A member of th e Zita Parishad with
the right to vote
(d) The Chairman of the Zila Parishad
94. The BaI\¥antrai Mehta Com mittee was a
committee on:
(a) Democratic dece ntrali sat ion
(b) Panc hayati Raj in stitution s
(c) Administrative arrangements for
rura l deve lopment
(d) Communitydevelopmentprogramme
95. Pan chayati Raj form of rural loca l government was adopted first by (in the
order):
(a) Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh
(b) Andhra Pradesh and West bengal
(c) Rajashtan and Andhra Prad es h
(d) Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan
96 . Th e Distri ct and Sessions Judge works
directl y under the contro l of:
(a) District Co llector
(b) Governor of the state
(c) Law Minister of the state
(d) High Court of the state
97. Which of the following is a committee on
Panchayati Raj in stitu tion s?
(a) Balwantrai Mehta Co mmittee
(b) G.V.K. Rao Committee
(c) Hanumantha Rao Co mmittee
(d) Ashok Mehta Co mmittee
98. ~The state shall take steps to organise
village Panchayats and endow them
with such powers as may be necessary
to enable t hem to function as units of
self-government." This provis ion is m entioned in:
(a) Part 1 of the Co n stitution
(b) Part JV-A of the Con stitution
( c) Part III of the Constitu tion
(d) Part IV of the Constitution
99. A Pres ident's ru le can be imposed in a
state under the provisions of:
1. Article 356
2. Article 360
3. Article 352
4 . Article 365
(a) only I
(b) I and 3
(e) I and 4
(d) 1 a nd 2
100. Which of the following Constituti o nal
Amendment act pro v ided for the
appointment of the sa me person as
Governor for two or more states?

(a) 4th Amendment

(b) 7th Amendment

(e) 11th Amendment
(d) 24th Amendment
101. Artic1e 154 states that the Governor can
exercise his executive authority e ither
directly or through officers su b o rdi ~
nate to h im . The word subordinate s
includes:
(a) All the ministers and the Chi ef
Minister
(b) All the mini sters except the Chief
Minister
(c) Only the Chi ef Min ister and the
Deputy Chief Minister
(d) Only the Cabinet Ministers
102. In the event of declaration of co n st itutiona l emergency in the state, the
President ca n :
1. Assume to himse lfall the fun ctio n s
of the state government including
the High Court.
2. Decla re that the powers of the state
legi slature shall be exercisable
under the author ity of the Governor.
3. Assume to him selfall the functions
of the state government except the
High Court.
4. Declare that the powers of the state
legislature shall be exercisable under
the authority of the parliament.
Of the above, the correct statem e nts are:
(a) I and 2
(b) 2 and 3
(e) 3 and 4
(d) 1 and 4
103. The correct statem ents about ordinance
making power of the Governor are:
]. It is laid down in Article 2] 3.
2. It can be issued by him after the
advice of the Pres iden t or sta te
cou ncil of mini sters.
3. It is co-extensive with the legisla tive
power of the state legi slature.
4. It can be issued only during the
recess of State Legislative Assembly
and not the Legislative Council.
5. It can not be withdrawn by him anytime.
(a) 2,3 and 4 (b) I, 3 a nd 5
(e) 1.2and 3 (d) 2. 4 and 5

,
____________________________~Pro~ru~'~e~Q~ue~s~.o~n~s~on~'n~m~on~~~fi~o/~(G~e~n~e~
ro~
'S~w~d~~~s~P~~~fi~m~~~~, 781
104. Which of the following was the subject
dealt by the Hanumantha Rao Committee?
(a) Block-level planning
(b) Finances of Panchayats
(c) Elections of Pan chayats
Cd) District Planning
105. Which of the following are the features of
74th Amendment Act on muni cipalities?
1. Reservation of seats for SCs and 8Th
in proportion of their population
(to the total population) in municipa l Area.
2 . Mandatory periodic elections every
5 years.
3. The procedure for mainte nan ce
of accounts and au dit would be
deci ded by the State Governor.
4. Constitution of Nagar Panchayats for
smaller urban area.
S. One-third of the seats sh a ll b e
reserved for women, excluding the
number of seats resen'ed for SC and
ST women.
(a ) I, 2 and 4
(b) 2, 3 and 5
(c) 3,4 and 5
(d) 1 and 2

(b) Both A and R are true but R is not a
correct explanation of A.
(c) A is true but R is false.
(d) A is false but R is true.
106. Assertion: Under the Constitution,
the Chief Minister holds office till the
pleasure of the Governor.
Reason: The Chief Minister is appointed
by the Governor.
107. Assertion: Lord Ripon's Resolution of
1882 was hailed as the 'Magna Carta' of
local government.
Reason: Lord Ripon is regarded as the
' fat h er of local se lf-government in
Indi a.'
108. Assertion: The 73rd amendment to the
Constitution gives a co nstitutional sta tus
to the Gram Sabha.
Reason: The Balwantrai Mehta Committee
re port made a fonna l mention of the
Gram Sabha.
109. Assertion: The Governor of a state is a
nominal (titular) executive head.
Reaso n: The Constitution has provided
for a parliamentary government in the
states.
110. Assertion: The Governor shall hold office
during the pleasure of the President.
Reason: The Governor of a state shall be
appointed by the President India.

r

ASSERTION (A) AND REASON (R)
PATTERN

Answer the following quest ions by using the
codes given below:
(a) Both A and R are true and R is the
co rrect explanation of A.

r MATCHING PATTERN
Match List-] with List-II and select the correct a nswe r by using the codes given below the lists.
111.

List-II (Muni cipal Corporation Authorities)
I . Co mmissioner
2. Sta nding Co mmittees
3. Mayor
4 . Coun cil

List-l (Role)
A. Deliberative organisation
-I B. Formal head
C. Management
D. Executive body
(a)

(b)
( c)
(d)

A
4

3
2
4

B
2
2
3

3

C

3
1
1
2

o

1

4
4
I

782 ,~/ndian Polity
112.

List- I (S tates)

List-11 (Gove rnor' s special responsib iliti es)
1. Law a nd order
2. Adm ini stration of tribal areas
3_ Develop men t of backward areas
4. Min ister for Tribal Welfare
5. Hill Areas Co mmittee wo rki ng

A _ Madhya Pradesh
B. Gujarat

C. Naga land
D. Assam

Codes:

113.

(a)
(b)
(e)
(d)

A
3
2
4
S

BCD

425
I
3
3

4

2

Li st I (Co mmi ttees)

A. G. V.K. Rao Co mmittee
B. Bal wantra i Mehta Com mittee

C. L.M. Singlwi Co mmittee
D. Asho k Me h ta Co mm ittee
Codes:

(a)
(b)
(e)
(d)

A

B

4
4

3
3
4
4

3
3

3
2

C

4

Li st " (Setu p on)
l. Panchayat i Raj in stitution s
2. Revitali sa tion of PRl s for democra cy and
deve lopment
3 . Existi ng adm in istrative arrangeme nts
fo r Rura l Deve lop me n t and Poverty
Allev iat ion Programmes.
4. Co mmunity Deve lopment Programme a nd
Na tiona l Exte nsion Service.
5. Pa nchaya ti Ra.j e lectio ns

I
2

2
1

114. The Governor of a state:
1. Possesses executive, leg islati ve and
judicial powe rs a na logou s to t he
Pres ide n t.
2. Has to act with the aid and advice of
the co un c il of ministers a lways.
3. Has the power to appoi nt and rem ove
the me mbers of State Publi c Serv ice
Co mmi ssio n.
4. Has the power to a ll ocate business of
the government among the variolls
mi nisters.
Of the above, the correct statements are:
(a) 1 and 2
(b) 2,3 and 4
(e) land4

(d) 1,3a nd 4

115. T h e Constitut ion says that t h e state
co un cil of mini ste rs hold office during
the pleasllre of the Governo r. The words

D
2
I

2

"during th e pleasure of the Governor" in
rea lity mean s;
(a) Pleasure of th e Preside n t
(b) Pleasure of the Pri me Minister
(c) Pleasure of the Chief Mi ni ster
(d) Pl easure of the Legi slat ive Assembly
116. The tcrm 'Cabinet' is mentioned in
which of the following art icles of the
Constitution ?
(3) Article 74
(b) Art icle 7S
(c) Article 352
(d) No t mention ed in the Co nsti tution
11 7. Whic h of the fo ll owi ng state me n ts with
regard to the CAG are correct'?
1. He is re s pon s ible only to t h e
Parliament.
2. He ce rtifies the net proceeds of any
til x .

Practice Questions on Indion Polity (General Studies-Prelims)

3. He co mpil es and mai ntains th e
accounts of state gove rnmen ts.
4 . He has co nt rol over th e issue of
money fro m the Co nsolidated Fund
of India.
(b) I, :i a nd 4
(a) 2 and 4
(d) 2, 3 a nd 4
( e) 1,2 a nd 3
118. Whi ch of th e fo ll owing state me n ts are
co rrect about the difference between
a ce nsure motion a nd a no-confi de nce
motion ?
1. A ce nsu re motio n sho ul d state th e
reason s for its adopt ion whe reas
a no-confide nce motion need not
state th e reaso ns for its adoption.
2. A n o-co nfide n ce motion ca n be
moved o nl y against the co un ci l
of mi ni ste rs, wh e rea s a cens u re
moti on ca n be moved aga in st the
counc il of ministers or an ind ividual m ini ster or a group of mi ni sters.
3 . The Governme nt mu st resign if a
no-co nfidence mot io n is pa ssed,
wherea s t h e Gove rnm ent n eed
not rcs igl1 if a ce n sure motion is
pa ssed.
4. A ce n sure motion ca n be moved
in bo th , the Lok Sa bha an d the
R.a.jya Sabha, whereas no-confidence
moti on can be moved onl y in the
Lok Sabha.
(b) 2,3 a nd 4
(a) 1,3and4
(d) I, 2 a nd 3
(e) I,2a nd 4
119. Th e first Lokpal Bill was in trod uced in
the Pa rl iament in:
(b) 1967
(a) 197 1
(d) 1972
( e) 1968
120. The Centra l Vig ilan ce Co mmi ssio n was
set up by:
(a) Co nst it uti ona l prov is ion
(b) Act of the Parlia ment
(e) Reso lu tion of t h e Sa nth anam
Committee
(d) Exec uti ve resolution
121. The fun cti ons of Estimates Committee
include:

~ 783

1. 1b suggest a lternative po l'i d es in

orel e r to bring out efficie ncy and
eco nomy in ad min Estra ti on .
2. 1b see that the ex penditure co nforms
to the a uth ority which governs it.
3. 1b exami n e whether the money is
weJl la id out within the limi ts of
the poli cy impli ed in the estim a tes.
4. To s uggest t h e fo rm in whi ch
estimates shall be prese ntcd to the
Parlia ment.
Of the a bove, th e co rrect state me nts are:
(a) l and2
(b) 1,3a nd4
(e) 1,2 and 4
(d) 1,2,3 a nd 4
122. The recom me nda t io ns of Balwantrai
Mehta Committee in clu es:
1. Officia l part ici pati on of po l itica l
parties in Pallc hayat i Raj affa irs.
2. Genui n e tra n s fer of power and
respo nsibility to the Pa nchayati Raj
in stitution s.
3. Co n s tituti o n a l prote ction for
P<l nch<lyat i Raj.
4. Di stri ct Co ll ector sho uld be the
Chairman of the Zil a Parishad.
5. Pa nchayat Sa miti to be the executive
body.
(b) 2, 4 and 5
(a ) 1, 2 a nd 5
(e) 2,3 a nd 4
(d) 1,3 and 4
123. "Vhich of the following state m ents is
in co rrect?
(a) Adjo u rn m ent mcans an in te rrupt io n in no rm a l bus in ess of the
Assemb ly.
(b) Prorogatio n mean s t he end of the
Asse mbl y.
( e) Dissolut ion mea ns th e e nd of the
Asse mbl y.
(d) Proroaga tion mea ns e nd of a session
of the Assembl y.
] 24. Which of the fo llowing are the compulsory
provi sion s of the 73rd Ame ndm ent Act
on Pan chayati Raj ?
1. Incii rect electio ns of the chairpersons
of Pan chayats at the inte rm ediate
and di stri ct level s.

784

?

l

lodioo Polity

2. Fresh elections within six months in
case of dissolution.
3. Provision for reservation of seats for
backward classes.
4. Giving representation to MPs and
MLAs in Panchayats.
(a) 1,3 and 4
(b) 2 and 4
(e) land2
(d) 2,3 and 4
125. Consider the following statements abollt
municipal corporations:
1. They are established in the states
by the acts of the concerned state
legislatures.
2. They are established in the union
territories by an order of the Chief
Administrator.
3 . They work under direct control and
supervision of state governments.
4. Their deliberative functions are separated from the executive functions.
Of the above, the correct statements
are:
(a) 1 and 3
(b) I, 3 and 4
(e) 1,2 and 3
(d) I, 2, 3 and 4
126. Wliich of the following is not correct
about a cantonment board?
(a) I~ is created by an executive resolutIOn.
(b) It works under the administrative
control of the Union Defence
Ministry.
(c) It is established for municipal administration for civilian population in
the cantonment area.
(d) It is a statutory body.
127. Under which of the following conditions, the UPSC can serve the needs of
a state?
1. When requested by the President
2 . When requested by the Governor
3. With the approval of Parliament
4. With the approval of President
5 . With the approval of the concerned
state legislature.

(a) 1 and 3
(b) 2 and S
(e) 2 and 4
(d) 1 andS

STATEMENT_I AND
STATEMENT_II PATTERN
Answer the following questions by using the
codes given below:
(a) Both Statement-I and Statement-Il are
correct and Statement-Il is the correct
explanation for Statement-I
(b) Both Statement-I and Statement-II are correct and Statement_II is not the correct
explanation for Statement-I
( e) Statement-I is correct but Statement-II is
incorrect
(d) Statement-I is incorrect but Statement-II
is correct
128. Statement-I: A minister at the Central
level can be dismissed by the Prime
Minister.
Statement-II: A minister is appointed by
President only on the advice of Prime
Minister.
129. Statement-I: The Finance Commission

facilitates the maintenance of financial
balance between the Union and the
states in the Indian federal system.
Statement-II: The Constitution of India
has given more financial powers to the
Union Government.
130 . Statement-I: The UPSC is the Central
recruiting agency in India.
Statement-II: It is an independent constitutional body.
131. Statement-I: The Governor is de-jure
head of state administration.
Statement-II: The Chief Minister is defacto head of state administration.
132. Statement-I: The Rajya Sabha has no
power to vote on the demands-for-grants.
Statement-II: A money bill or finance bill
dealing with taxation cannot be introduced in the Rajya Sabha.

Practice Questions on Indian Polity (General Studies-Prelims)

~ 785

t MATCHING PATTERN
Match List-I with Li st-ll and select the co rrect a n swer by usi ng the codes given below.
33.

List-! (Mea ning of wTits)
A. It is a co mmand issued by the court to a
publi c offic ial ask ing him to perform hi s

Li st-II (Name of \vri ts)
1. Injun cti o n

B. It is issued by a high e r court to a lower
court when the latte r exceeds its
jurisdiction .
C. It is issued by the CDurts to enquire into
th e lega lity of cla im of a person to a
pubJ ic office.
D. It is issued by the court asking a person to
do a thing or refrain fro m doin g a thing.

2. Mandamus

official duties.

!

Codes:

A

Ca)
(b)

(c)
(d)
134.

3

5
2
4

B
4

3
4

5

C

5

4

5
2

3. Certiorari
4 . Prohibition
5. Quo-warranto

D
1
2
1

3

Li st-II (Fun cti o ns)
1. Exami nes whether the promises made
A. Public Accounts Com mittee
by th e mini ste rs on the fl oor of the
house have been fulfilled.
B. Co mmittee on Subord in ate Legislation 2. Exam in es the CAG's report on the
appropriation acco unts a nd ascer tai ns
whether the fund s voted by Pa rli ament are spent within the sco pe of th e
deman d.
c. Co mmi ttee o n Publi c Undertaki ngs
3 . Examines whether the powers to make
rul es and regulations delegated by th e
Parliament a re properly exercised by
the executi ve.
D. Com mittee on Govern ment Assura n ces. 4. Examines the reports an d <Icco unts of
the publi c undertakin gs and finds out
whether their affai rs are be in g managed in accordance with sound business
prin ci pl es and prudent co mm erci al
practices.
D
8
C
Codes:
A
2
4
3
(a)
1
4
3
2
(b)
2
4
3
1
(c)
1
3
4
2
(d)
List-! (Co mmittees)

tt1' Indian Polity

786 "
135.

List-I (Kinds of Grants)

A. Thken grant

whose details cannot b e stated.
2. It is voted by the Lok Sabha before the end of the

B. Exceptional gran t
C. Vote of c redit

financial year.
3. It is voted by the Lok Sabha after the e nd of the

D. Excess gran1

4. It f~rms no part of the current serv ice of any

Codes:

Ca)

(b)

Cc)
Cd)

136.

List-II ( Impli cations)

I. It is gra nted for meeting an un expected dema nd

financial year.

financial yea r.
5. It is gra nt ed when fu nd s to meet proposed
expend itu re on a new service can be made ava ilable
by reappropriation.

A
4

5
3
5

B

3

4
4
3

C
5
1
2
1

D. Fifth Schedule

Ca)

(b)

.,

Cc)
Cd)

1

1

2
2

4

schedu led tribes.
2. Administration of tribal areas in states of Assam,
Meghalya, Tripura an d Mizoram.
3. Provisions as to the Spea ker a nd Deputy Speaker of
state Leg islative Assemblies.
4. Powers, au thorit y and responsibilities of
municipalities.
5. Powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats.

C. Twelfth Schedul e

B
3
2
3
3

1

1. Adm inistration and co ntrol of schedul ed areas and

B. Second Schedule

A

3

List-II (Provision s)

List-I (Schedul es in th e
Const itution )
A. Sixth Schedul e

Codes:

D
2

C
4

5
4

5

137. The most importa nt Legislative powe r
of the Govern o r is:
(a) Nomi nating m embers to the state
legisla tive coun cil.
(b) Issuing ordinances
(e) Assenting bills passed by the state
l.~g 'islature

Cd) Dissolving the sta t e leg is la ti ve
Assembl y
]38. Assert ion: T h e Chief Mini ste r is the
channel of com muni cation b etween
the Goyernor .and the sta te council of
ministers.

D

2
3
1

1

Reaso~: The Chief Minister is the head of
t h e state co un cil of ministers.
Select the correct code:
(a) Both A a nd R are true a nd R is the
correct expla n a tion of A.
(b) Both A a nd R are true bu t R is not a
correct explanation of A.
(e) A is true hut R is false.
(d) A is fa lse but R is true.
139. Whi ch of the following are the voluntary
prov isio ns of the 73 rd Amendment Act
on Panchayati Raj?

_________ _ _ _ _ _ _

--"Pr"a'"'cu"c"'"Q"'u::"::""a'::'"a:::'"':'d:,,i"a",,p"a:::lityll(G::,,,::,,,ra,-'::S'::u:d:i:,,,:: ---,,Pr-",:::im:::'")-_~
~, 787

1. Making provision for reservation to
the backward classes.
2. Authorising the Panchayats to prepare
plans for economic development.
3. Organisation of Gram Sabhas.
4. Conferring financial powers on Panchayats with regard to taxes, fees
and so on.
5. Setting up of a State Election Com mission to conduct elections to the
Panchayats.
(a) 1,2,3 and 4 (b) 1,2 and 5
(e) 1,2and4
Cd) 1,2,4andS
140. Assertion: The upse's function is not to
decide but to advise.
Reason: The upse is a constitutional body
Select the correct code:
(a) Both A and R are true and R is the
correct explanation of A.
(b) Both A and R are true but R is not a
correct explanation of A.
(e) A is true but R is false.
(d) A is false but R is true.
141. Which of the following are true of the
Central Administrative Tribunal?
1. It was established under the
provisions of Article 312-A of the
Constitution.
2. It was set up by an order of the
President of India .
3. It was set up in 1985.
4. It was set up by an Act of Parliament.
Ca) 1,2 and 3 (b) 1,3 and 4
Ce) 3 and 4
Cd) 2,3 and 4
142. If any question arises as to the age of
a judge of a High Court, the question
shall be decided by the President after
consultation with:
(a) The Chief Justice of the concerned
High Court
(b) The Governor of the concerned state
(c) The Attorney-General of India
(d) The Chief Justice of India
143. The need for a separate parliamentary
committee on public undertakings was
first visualised by:
Ca) Ashok Mehta
(b) G.V. Mavalankar

(c) Lanka Sundaram
(d) Krishna Menon Committee
144. Assertion: Parliamentary control over
public expenditure is diminished by
the creation of the Contingency Fund
of India.
Reason: The Contingency Fund of India
is operated by the President of India.
Select the correct code:
(a) Both A and R are true and R is the
correct explanation of A.
(b) Both A and R are true but R is not a
correct explanation of A.
(c) A is true but R is false.
(d) A is false but R is true.
145. Which of the following pairs are incorrectly matched?
1. Vote on
account

10 allow
enough time
for legislative
scrutiny and
discussion of
the budget.
2. Charged
Not submitted to
expenditure
the Parliament.
3. Vote of
Blank cheque
credit
given to the
executive.
4. Excess grant
Submitted
directly to the
Lok Sabha for
its approval
(a) 1 and 3
(b) 1,2 and 4
( e) 2 and 4
Cd) 3 and 4
]46 . Which of the following expenditures are
charged on the Consolidated Fund of
India?
1. Salaries of the Supreme Court judges
2. Pensions of the Chairman of UPSC
3. Debt charges for which the Government of India is liable
4. Emoluments and allowances of the
Prime Minister
Ca) 1,2and3 (b) 1,2,3and4
Ce) 1,3 and 4 (d) 1,2 and 4
147. Which of the following are the functions
of the Public Accounts Committee of
Parliament?

788

r;J

Indian Pality

J. 1b exa min e, in the lig ht of CAG's
re po rt, the acco unts show in g the
a ppro pr ia ti o n o f sum s gra nted by
th e Parli ame n t.
2. Th examin e, i n the lig ht of CAG's

repo rt, the statement of acco unts
of state corporatio ns, t radi ng an d
manufa c tu r in g proj ec ts exce p t of
those as are all otted to the co m m it·
tee on publi c u nderta k ings.
3. To exa min e t h e s ta te m e n t of
acco un ts of a u to no mous and se mi a u tono m ous bodies, th e a udi t of
wh ich is co nduc ted by t he CAG.
4. 'Ib exa m ine if a ny mon ey has bee n
spe nt o n a n y se r vice durin g a
fin ancia l year i n excess of the
a m oun t gra n ted by ho use ofpeop lc
for that pu rpose.
(a) I , 2 a nd 4
(b) I, 2, 3 and 4
(e) 1,2a nd3
(d) 1,3a nd 4
148. Asser t io n : The d ev ice of Adj o urnm e nt
Motio n is n ot used by t he Raj ya Sab ha.
Re.:'Json : An Adjou rnment Motion docs not
resul t in re movi ng the Governm e nt fro m
office.
Select t he co r rect code:
(a) Both A a nd R <I re t rue <l nd R is the
correct ex p la nat ion of A.
(b) Both A a nd R are tru e bu t R is not
th e co rrect ex p la natio n of A.
ec) A is true bu t R is fa lse.
(d) A is fa lse but R is true.
149. Whi c h of the foll owi ng a re t rue of Ce nt ra l Vigilance Co m mission?
1. It was set up in 1964.
2. It is a statu to ry body.
3 . Its functionsare advisory in the sa me
se nse as t hose of UPSC.
4. Its mode of rece iving co mpla in ts is
similar to th at of t he Pa rl ia me ntary
Co m m issione r for Admin istrat io n
in UK.
(a) 1,2, 3 a nd 4 (b) I , 3 a nd 4
(e) 1,2 a nd 3
(d) 1 a n d 3
150. Wh ic h o f th e fo ll ow i ng state m en ts
re lated to UPSC are correct?
1. It derives its fu nctions only from the
Co n st itutio n .

2. It is not co nsulted o n matters rela ted
to t he reservation of posts fo r the
BCs, 5Cs a n d 515.
3 . The Pres ide nt ca n exclude posts, services a nd matte rs fro m the pu rview
of co n sultat ion with UPSC.
4. The Preside nt can place the perso nne l sys te m of any 10Cil i a u thor it.y,
corpo ra te body o r public institu tio n
wit h in th e j u risd ict ion of upse.
(a) 2 a nd 3
(b) 1,2 a nd 3
(e) 2,3 a nd 4
(d) 1, 2 a nd 4
15 1. T he executi ve office r ofthe canto nm ent
boa rd is appo inted by t he:
(a) Presi de n t o f th e boa rd
(b) Defe nce Secreta ry
(e) Chief SecTetary of t he sta te
(d) Pres iden t of Ind ia
152. T he cor rec t state m e n ts about m u n icipali ties in clu de:
1. T hey a re known by va ri ous o lh eT
nam es in d iffe re n t states.
2. T hey are cont ro ll ed by t he state
gover n me n ts.
3. Vesting of the executive au th ority in
the Chai r ma n .
4. T hey a re statuto ry bod ies.
(a) 1,2a nd4
(b) 1,2,3a nd4
(e) 1 an d 2
(d) 1,2 an d 3
153. Who/ whic h of t he fo ll owi ng can aboli sh
a Sta te Legislative Cou nc il ?
(a) P",lia me n t (b) Pres iden t
(e) Gove rn or
Cd) Sta te Assem b ly
]54. In whi ch of the fo ll owing recomme ndatio ns, t he Ashok Mehta Comm ittee dif·
fe red fro m Ba lwa ntra i Me hta Co m m ittee?
1. 1\vo-tie r sys te m of Pa nchayati Raj .
2. Officia l pa rtici patio n of poli tica l parties at a ll leve ls of Pa nc haya t electio ns.
3. Zihl Paris ha d as the execu tive body.
4. Entrusting developm e nt functions to
t he Zila Par isha d.
(a) 1,2 a nd 4
(b) 1,2 a nd 3
(e) l an d 2
(d) I ,3and4
]55. Un der whi c h of t he followi ng cjrcllm sta nces, t h e Gove rn or ca n rese rve a
state bill fo r t he co nsidera tion of the
Prcs idem?

,

I
I,

Predice Questions on Indian Polity (General Studies-Prelims)
1. If it is ultra vires.
2. If it is opposed to the Directive Principles of State Policy.
3. If it e ndangers the position of the
state High Court.
4. If it is dealing with the compulsory acquisition of property under
Article 31A.
(a) 1,2 and 3 (b) 1,2,3 and 4
(c) 2,3 and 4 (d) 1,3 and 4
156. Whi ch of the following expenditures are
'charged' on the Co nsolidated Fund of
India?
1. Salaries and allowances of Chai nnan
of Council of States.
2. Salaries and a l10wances of Com ptroller and Auditor-GeneraL
3. Any sum required to satisfy any
judgement of any arbitral tribunal.
4. Salaries and allowa nces of Deputy
Speaker.
(a) 2 and 3
(b) I, 2 and 3
(c) 1,2,3 and 4
(d) 2 and 4
157. Which of the fonawing must be approved
by the Public Accounts Com mittee before
being sub mitted to the Lok Sabha for
voting?
(a) Additional grant
(b) Exceptional grant
(c) Token grant
(d) Excess grant
158. Which of the following is not involved
in the preparation of budget?
(a) Finance Ministry
(b) Administrative Ministries
(c) Com ptroller and Auditor-General
(d) Finance Commission
159. Which of the following categories of bills
require prior consent of the President
befo re their introduction?
1. Bills to reorgani se states.
2. Bills affecting taxes in which the
states are interested.
3. State bills imposi ng restriction s on
freedom of trade.
4 . Bills involving expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
(a) 1,2and4 (b) 1,2, 3and4
(c) 2,3, an d 4 (d) 1, 2,3

~ 789

160 . The Inter-State Council consists of:
1. Prime Minister
2. Chi ef Ministers of all states
3. Chief Ministers of union territories
with legislatures
4. Eight Union Cabinet Ministers
5. Administrators of union territories
with legislatures
(a) J, 2, 3, 4 and 5 (b) 1,2, 3 and 4
(c) 1,2 and 3
(d) 1,2, 3 and 5
161. Whi ch of the following Constitutional
Amendment Acts discontinued the special representation of the Anglo-Indians
in the legislatures by nomination?
(a) 102nd Amendment Act
(b) 103rd Amendment Act
(c) 104th Amendment Act
(d) 105th Am endm e nt Act
162. On which of the following items, the
Finance Comm issio n makes recommendations to the President?
1. The distribution between the Union
and the states of the net proceeds
of taxes and the allocation between
the sta tes of the respective shares of
such proceeds.
2 . The principles which should govern
the grants-in-aid of the revenues of
the states out of the Consolidated
Fund of India .
3. The measures needed to augment the
Consolidated Fund of a state to supplement the resources of the municipalities in the state on the basis of
t~e recommendations made by the
Finance Commission of the state.
4. Any other matter referred to it by the
President in the interests of sound
finance.
(a) I , 2 and 4 (b) 1,2,3 and 4
(c) 1 and 2
(d) I, 2 and 3
163. Fundamental Duties were incorporated
in the Constitution on the recommendation of:
(a) Shah Commission
(b) First Administrative Reforms Co mmission of India
(c) Santhanam Com mittee
(d) Swara n Singh Comm ittee

790

P

Indian Polity

STATEMENT-I AND
STATEMENT-II PATTERN
An swe r t he following questio n s by usi ng t he
codes given below:
(a) Both St<l teme nt·1 and State men t-II are
correc t and State me n t-II is the co rrect
ex plan ation for Statement- (
(b) Both State me nt·( and Sta tement-II are correct a nd State m ent·I! is not the co rrect
exp la natio n for Stiltc ment·T
(e) Statement-I is corrcct but State ment-II is

in co rrect

Cd ) Stateme n t-I is in correct but State m e nt-II

is co rrect

164. Statem e nt-I : The Pres iden t of India ca n
be impeached for the violation of the
Co n stituti o ll .
Sta tement-II : The Co nstitution lays down
the procedure for impeac h ment of the
President.
J 65. St..1 te ment-l : The 73rd Am e ndment Act is
a s igni fican t la ndm ark in the evo lution
of grassroots democra ti c in stitution s in
the coun try.
Statement- ff: The Act ha s brought th e
Panchayat i Raj in stitutions under the
purview of justi c iabl e part of the Co nstitution.
166. Con s ider the following sta tements about
the Governor:
f . He submi ts h is res ignation letter to
th e Chi e f Justi ce of the state.
2 . He should have co mpl e ted 35 yea rs
of age.
3. Hi s emo lum ents, a ll owances and
pri vil eges a re determined by t he
Pres ide nt.
4. No c rimin a l proceedings ca n be
instituted aga inst him .
Of the above, the in co rrect stateme n ts
a re:
( b ) 2, 3 and 4
Ca) 1 and 3
Ce) I , 3 and 4 ( d) 2a nd4
167. How many memb e rs a rc nominated
to t he State Leg islative Cou nc il by the
Gove rn or?
Ca) O ne·third (b) One-twelfth
Ce) O n e·eig hth ( eI ) On e-sixth

J 68. Assertion: J\ minister at the state leve l

co ntinues in office till he e njoys the
co nfidence of the Chi e f Mini ste r.
Reaso n: Th e Ch ief Min ister ca n ask him to
res ign or advise the Governo r to dismi ss
him in case of differen ce of opinion.
Selec t the co rrect cod e:
(a) Both A and R are true an d R is the
co rrect expl a nation of A.
(b) Both A a nd R are true but R is not a
correct ex pl a nation of A.
(c) A is true but R is fa lse.
(d ) A is fa lse but R is t rue.
169. Whi c h of the following a rc tru e of the
reco mm e ndati on s of Ashok Mehta Co mmittee on Pan ch ayati Raj?
1. C r e ati o n of Manda i Panc h ayat
coverin g a population of 10,000 to
15,000.

2. T he state leg islature to have a co mmittee o n Pan c hayati Raj to look
after t he needs of weaker sectio ns.
3. If Pan chayati Raj inst itut ions arc
superseded, elections m ust be he ld
withi n o ne yea r.
4 . Nyaya Panchayats should be presided
over by th e village develo pm e nt
officer.
Ca) 1,2 and4
Cb) 2a nd4
Ce) 1,2 a nd 3 Cd) onl y 2
1 70. Whi ch of the fo ll owi ng are true of th e
provi sio n s of the 74th Amendment Act
o n muni c ipalities?
] . Wards Co mmittees, for wards with
populati o n of two lakhs.
2. The state Gove rnor may a utho r ise
them to levy, co ll ect a nd a ppropriate taxes.
3. A Mu ni ci pal co un c il for sma ll e r
Urba n area.
4. The Twe lfth Sc h e dule co ntain s
20 functiona l ite ms for the muni c ipa liti es.
Ca) 1,3 and 4 (b) 1,2 and 4
Ce) 3 o n ly
Cd) 3 and 4
1 7]. Assert ion: Th e numbe r of members of
UPSC is determined by th e Preside nt.
Rea so n: The members of t he UPSC are
appo in ted by th e Presi dent.

Practice uestions on Indian Poli

Select the correct code:
(a) Both A and Rare tru{f and R is the
correct explanation o'f A.
(b) Both A and R are true and R is not a
correct explanation of A.
( e) A is true but R is false.
(d) A is false but R is true.
172. Assertion: The members of All-India
Services work in the Central Government, state governments and union
territories.
Reason: They are selected and recruited
on the basis of all-India competitive examinations conducted by the
UPSC.

Select the correct code:
(a) Both A and R are true and R is the
correct explanation of A.
(bJ Both A and R are true but R is not a
correct e'x planation of A.
(c) A is true but R is false.
Cd) A is false but R is true.
173. Assertion: The principle of the rule
of lapse leads to 'rush of expenditure'
towards the end of a financial year.
Rea son: The unspent voted expenditure
would lapse by the end of the financial
year.
Select the correct code:
(a) "Both A and R are true and R is the
. correct explanation of A.
(b) Both A and R are true but R is not a
correct explanation of A.
(c) A is true but R is false.
(d) A is false but R is true.
174 . Match the following:
List-I
List-II
(Par1iamentary
(Created in)
Committees)
A. Committee on
1. 1923
Government
Assurances
B. Committee on
2. 1953
Public Undertakings
C. Committee on
3. 1921
Subordinate Legislation
D. Public Accounts
4. 1953
Committee
5 . 1964

Codes:

General Studies-Pre/ims

(a)

A
4

B

791
C
I
4
2

D
3
I
I

5
5
4
5
(d)
2
5
4
3
175. Which of the following are true of Centra l Vigilance Commission?
1. It was set up on the recommendation
of Santhanam Committee.
2. It does not exercise superintendence
over the functioning of CBI.
3. It is set up by an executive resolution
of the Government of India.
4. It consists of a chairman and three
members.
(a) 1,2 and 4 (b) 1,3 and 4
(c) I and 3
(d) I and 4
176. Whi ch of the following will be the consequences of dec1aration of nationa l
emergency by the President?
1. The Centre can issue directives to the
state executives.
2. The President can extend the normal
tenure of the Lok Sabha.
3. The President can suspend all the
Fundamental Rights of citizens.
4. The President can modify the
distribution pattern of financial
resources between Centre and
states.
(a) I, 3 and 4
(b) I and 4
(c) 1,2,3and4 (d) 1.2and3
177. Which one of the following pairs is correctly matched?
(a) 1919 Act - Dyarchy at the Centre
(b) 1861 Act - Portfolio system
(e) 1935 Act - Bicameralism
(d) 1853 Act - Governor-Genera l of
India
178. Which of the following are true of the
President's ordinance making power?
1. It is laid down in Article 123.
2. Its ambit is coextensive with the legislative power of Parliament.
3. He can promulgate an ordinance
only when the Lok Sabha is not in
session.
4. It is a discretionary power of the
President.

(b)
(c)

2

,

I'

792

,!1'

Indian Pality

Ca) 1,2, 3 a nd 4 (b) I , 2 an d 4
Cc) I an d 2
Cd) 1,2, and 3
179 . Whi ch of the followi ng are the li m itatio n s on the sove reig nty of Indi a n Parl ia me n t?
]. Fu nda me n ta l Rights
2 . Jud ic ia l Review
3 . Fede ralism
4. Wri tte n Co nst ituti o n
Ca) 1,3 a nd 4 (b) 1,2 a nd 3
Cc) 1 a nd 2
Cd) 1, 2, 3 and 4
180. Asse r tio n : Under th e Gove rnm e n t of
Indi a Act of ] 935, th e Res idua ry powe rs
were vested in the Ce ntra l Legisla ture.
Reason: T h e Gove rnm en t of India Act
of 1935 div ided the subj ects in to t h ree
li sts viz. the fede ra l, p rov in c ia l a nd
co nc urrent.
Select the correct code:
(a) Both A and R are true and R is the
correct exp lanatio n of A.
(b) Both A and R are true b u t R is not a

co rrect exp la natio n of A.

(e) A is true bu t R is fa lse.
(d) A is fa lse but R is tr ue.
181. Whi ch of the fo ll owin g are th e fe de ra l
features of the India n Co nst itu tion?
J. Rig id Co n stit uti o n
2. Bicam era l leg isla ture
3. Office o f the CAG
4. Co ll ective respo nsibili ty
5. Office of th e Gove rn or
Ca) I , 2 and 3
(b) I , 2 a nd 5
Cc) 1,2,3 and 4 Cd) I a nd 2
182. Assertio n : T h e Pres id e n t of India
dete rmi nes t h e q ua lifications of t h e
Cha irman and me m bers of th e Fi na nce
Com m ission.
Reason: The Cha irm an a nd me mbers of
the Finance Com m iss io n are a p po inted
by t he Presi de n t of In d ia.
Se lect t he correct code:
(a) Both A a nd R a re t rue a nd R is th e
co rrect exp lanat io n of A.
(b) Both A a nd R are tru e bu t R is not a
co rrect ex pl a na ti o n of A.
(c ) A is tr ue but R is fa lse.
(d) A is fa lse but R is tru e.

183 . T he correct state me n ts a bout Fi n ance
Co m m ission are:
1. It is to act as the ba lanci ng whee l of
Indi a n fisca l fede ra lism
2. It co nsists of a cha irma n a nd three
ot he r membe rs.
3 . Qua lificat ions of the members of the
Co m m issio n a re determ in ed by t he
Pres ide n t.
4. It is consti t uted under th e provisi ons
of Articl e 280.
Ca) 2, 3 a nd 4 (b) 2 a nd 3
Cc) I a nd 4
Cd) 1, 2 a nd 3
184 . T he Indi a n Pres ide nt's veto powe r is a
co mbin at io n of:
] . Pocket veto
2. Absolute veto
3. Suspe n sive veto
4. Qualified veto
(b) l ,3and 4
Ca) 2 a nd 3
Cc) 2, 3 a nd 4
Cd) 1,2and3
185. The present re latio n ship betwee n th e
Preside n t and t he cou n cil of m ini sters
is governed by the p rov isio ns of:
(a) 42nd Ame ndm e n t Act
(b) 48t h Ame nd m e n t Act
(e) 54th Ame ndm e n t Act
(d) 44th Am e ndm e n t Act
] 86. T he Zo n a l Coun c il s have bee n establ is hed by,
(a) Article 263 of the Con st itu tio n
(b) States Reorganisa ti o n Act
(e) Zona l Coun cils Act
(d) An order of th e Presi de nt of India
187. Whi ch of th e fo ll owi ng state m e n ts a re
correct?
1. Pa rlia m e n t ca n increase a tax.
2. Pa rlia me n t ca nn ot reduce a tax.
3. Pa rlia ment ca n a bolish a tax.
4. Pa rliame nt canno t increase a tax.
5. Parliame nt can reduce a tax .
Ca) 1,3a n d5
(b) 3,4a nd 5
Cc) 2,3 a nd 4
Cd) 3 an d 4
188. Whi ch of th e fo ll owing state me nts a re
co r rect wi t h rega rd to t he exp e nditu re
charged u po n th e Co nsoHdated Fu n d o f
In d ia?

Practice Questions on Indian Polity (General Studies-Prelims)
1. It is subject to the vote of Parliament.
2. It is Subject to the discussion in

Parliament.
3. It is subject to the vote of Lok Sabha
only.
4. It is not subject to the vote of
Parliament.
Ca) I and 2
(b) 2 and 3
Cc) 2 and 4
Cd) I and 4
189. The correct statements regarding the
difference between the pardoning powers
of President and Governor are:
1. The Governor can pardon sentences
inflicted by court martial while the
President cannot.
2. The President can pardon death sentence while Governor cannot.
3. The Governor can pardon death sentence while the President cannot.
4. The President can pardon sentences
inflicted by court martial while the
Governor cannot.
ea) I and 2
(b) 2 and 4
Cd) 3 and 4
ec) I and 3
1911). Which of the following statements are
correct regarding the powers of a Governor to reserve a bill for the consideration of the President?
1. It is laid down in Article 200.
2. It is not a discretionary power of the
Governor.
3. It is compulsory, if the bill endangers
the position of High Court.
ea) I, 2 and 3
(b) 3 only
ec) I and3
Cd) 2 and 3
191. The incorrect statements about Central
Vigilance Commission are:
1. It was set up on the recommendations of First Administrative
Reforms Commission of India.
2. It is headed by the Central Vigilance
Commissioner appointed by the
Prime Minister.
3. Its functions, in certain cases,
overlap with the functions of the
UPSC.

793

4. It is certainly a substitute for an
Ombudsman.
5. It receives complaints directly from
aggrieved persons.
Ca) I, 4 and 5 (b) I, 2 and 4
Cd) 3,4 and 5
ec) 3 and 4
192. Which of the following civil services find
mention in the Constitution?
1. Indian Administrative Service
2. Indian Forest Service
3. Indian Police Service
4. AH·India Judicial Service
5. Indian Foreign Service
ea) I and 3
(b) I, 2 and 3
Cc) 1,3and5
Cd) I, 3 and 4
193. In which of the following circumstances,
the President can remove a member of
the UPSC without referring the matter
to the Supreme Court?
1. If he engages, during his term of
office, in any paid employment
outside the duties of his office.
2. If he is adjudged an insolvent.
3. If he is unfit to continue in office
by reason of infirmity of mind or
body.
4. lfhe becomes, in any way, concerned
or interested in any contract or
agreement made by or on behalf
of the Government of India or the
government of a state.
Ca) 2 and 3
(b) 4 only
ec) I only
Cd) I, 2 and 3
194. Which of the foHowing are not the con·
cerns of the UPSC?
1. Classification of services
2. Promotion
3. Training
4. Disciplinary matters
5. Talent hunting
Ca) 2, 4 and 5
(b) 1,3and4
ec) I and 3
Cd) I and 4

794

f7

Inglon Polity

~ MATCHING PATTERN
Match List·} with Li st·ll and select the corr.~:!ct answer by usin g the codes ~i¥eJl be low the
respective li sts.
195.

Li st-IJ (Provisions)
1. Introduced Dyarchy
2. Placed Indian affairs unde r the direct control of
the British Governm e nt .
3. Il)tr.ocJ!J-~e d reprt§cJl,.tatjve j nsti!UJ~on s.
4 . Intrgducc,9 p rovjn~la l 3lJtonomy.
5. Introdu ced the prin.(;ipl e of eIt.etioJl.

Lis~ 1 (Acts)

A. Indian COlJTIcils ,Act of 1.86].
B. Government of India Act
of 1919
C. Indian Cpj.Jnc ils Act of 1892
D. Pitt's I.nd ia Act of 1784
Codes:

A

Ca)
(b)
Cc)
(d)

5
5
3
3

B
J

4
4
J

C
3
2
2
5

STATEMENT-I AND
STATEMENT-II PATTERN
A nswe r the fo n owing question s by llsi ng the

codes given below:

(a) Bo.th State rnen.h l a n.d Sta teme nt-II are
,c orrect 8Qd .8ta..tement-1I )S the correct
exp lanatio}1 for Statemen t- I
(b) Both Statement·I and Statement·Il are cor·
rect and StatemenH I is n,ot the corre ct
explanation (or .statem ent·1
(c) ·S.tat~ me nt.I is co rrect buj:: <sta teme nt·II is
in.co rrect
(d) Statement·} is jncorrect but Statement·II
is correct
]96. State m e nt- I: N ITJ Aayog is neither a
statutory body nor a co ns!itutiona l body.
Statement-I]: Lt is established by an executive resolution o f the Union Cabin et.
197. Statement·J: T he Con stitutioQ of Indi a
is quasi-feder:al.
Statem entd l: It has given more powers to
the Central GovernmelJ.t than to the state
governments.
198. Sta tement-J: ' I'he Chief Minister can di smiss a mini ster of st<J.te government.

D
2
3
5
2

Statement·ll: The Chief Minister is the
h..e.!i..Q of the state council of ministers.
199 . Which of the following are c orrec t
with rega rd to th e fun.ctions of the

UPSC?

I. 1b co nduc.t exa minations for appoint·

ments to th§ services pf tl)e Union .
2. 1b assist st.:'ltes, if reque$ted, in f ra m·
ing and ,operating schemes of joint
rec.ruit.m,e nt (or any se rvi ces for
whi cp cand'ld.ates possessing spec ia l
qualifica tion s are r~e quir:ed.
3. 1b advjs,e the JJ.nj,p n ,and state gove rn.m.e.n t,s on all ma tje rs re lating
to methods of re,cruitment to civil
se rvices and for civil posts.
4. 'Tb prese nt, annually, to the Pr!!sident
a report as to the ,work dO,n e by it.
(a) J, ~a nd 3 (b) J, 3a nd ~
(c) 1,2 and 4 (d) I" J, 3 a,nd 4
ZOO. Wh i..ch of the foHowing writs i s not specifically provided in the Co n stitution of
India ?
(a) Prohibiti.on
(b) Mandamu s
(e) Q1,lowarranto (d) Inj unction

Practice Questions on Indion Polity (Generc/ Studies..".....prelims)

~, 795

ANSWERS
1. c
ll. d
2<' c
31. c
41. b
51. d
. 61. b
71. b
81. d
91. d
101. a
lll . d
121. b
131. a
HI. C

151. d
161. C
171. b
18], d
191. b

\

2. b
12. c
22. b
32. d
42. d
52. c
62. d
72.0
82. c
92. d
102. c
liZ. c
122. b
132. b
142. d
152. b
162. b
1.72. b
182. d
192. d

3. d
13. d
23. d
33. a
43. d
53. c
63. c
73. b
83. b
93. d
103. .C
113. c
1~3. b
133. c
143. c
153 . .a
163. d
173. a
183 . .C
193. d

4. b
14. a
24. c
34. c
44. d
54. d
64. c
74. b
84. c
94. d
104. d
114. c
124. c
134. b
144. d
154. b
164. b
)74. Ii
184. 0
194. c

5. d
15. d
25. c
35 . .a
45. b
55. d
65. c
75. d
85. a
95. c
105, d
115. d

125. b
135. b
145. C
155. b
16S.a
.175. C
185. d
}95. d

6. 0
16. c
20. d
36. a
46. c
56. c
66. b
76. b
86. a
.9 6.0
106. a
116.c
126. a
136, c
146. a
156 . .C
166. a
176. b
186. b
196. a

7. b
17. c

8. 0
18. c

~7, £

~8. d

37. c
47. b
57. c
67. c
77, b

38. il
48. d
58. c
68. d
78. d
88. b
98. d
108. c

87. a
97. d
107.b
)17, ,c
127, £
137, b
147, b
157. d
167. d
177, b
187. b
)97. il

118, Ii
U8. 'd
)38. a
148. b
158. d
168.,.
178. ,C
)88. <0
198. ,d

9, a
19. b
~9, c
39. 0
49. b
59. c
69. d
79. c
89. b
9.9. c
109. ,a
119. c
129, ,a
139. c
149. c
159.. b
169. d
179. d
189, b
1.9.9,. C

10. b
20, a
30. b
40. d
50. d
60. d
70, b
80. d
90. c
100. 'b
)1O,a
)20, d
130. b
lAO, 'b
150, a
)60. C
170. e
180. d
)90. c
~OO. d

III
UPSC Questions on Indian Polity
(General Studies-Mains 2013-2022)
~ 2013 TEST PAPER

l. The role of individual MPs (Members of

Parliament) has diminished over the
years and as a result healthy construetive debates on policy issues are not
usual1y witnessed. How far can this
be attributed to the anti-defection law
which was legislated but with a different
intention?
[200 words] 10
2. Discuss Section 66A of IT Act, with reference to its alleged violatio'n of Article 19
of the Constitution.
[200 words] 10
3. Recent directives from Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas are perceived by
the 'Nagas' as a threat to override the
exceptional status enjoyed by the State.
Discuss in light of Article 371A of the
Indian Constitution.
[200 words] 10
4. 'The Supreme Court of India keeps a
check on arbitrary power of the Parliament in amending the Constitution:
Discuss critically.
[200 words] 10
5. Many State Governments further bifurcate geographical administrative areas
like Districts and Thlukas for better
governance. In light of the above, can
it also be justified that more number of
smaller States would bring in effective
governance at State level? Discuss.
[200 words] 10
6. Constitutional mechanisms to resolve the
inter-state water disputes have failed to
address and solve the problems. Is the

failure due to structural or process inadequacy or both? Discuss.
[200 words] 10
7. Discuss the recommendations of the 13th
Finance Commission which have been
a departure from the previous com missians for strengthening the local government finances.
[200 words] 10
8. Pressure group politics is sometimes seen
as the informal face of politics. with
regards to the above, assess the structure
and functioning of pressure groups in
India.
[200 words] 10
9 . 'A national Lokpal, however strong it
may be, cannot resolve the problems of
immorality in public affairs: Discuss.
[200 words] 10
10. What is meant by Gujral doctrine? Does
it have any relevance today? Discuss.
[200 words] 10

~ 2014 TEST PAPER
1. Starting from inventing the 'basic struc~

ture' doctrine, the judiciary has played
a highly proactive role in ensuring that
India develops into a thriving democracy. In light of the statement, eva luate
the role played by judicial activism
in achieving the ideals of democracy.
[200 words] l2 '1z
2. Though the federal principle is dominant
in our Constitution and that principle
is one of its basic features, but it is
equally true that federalism under the

UPSC Questions on Indian Polity (General Studies-Mains 20 I3-2022)

Indian Const itutio n leans in favour of
a strong Centre , a featur e that milita tes
agains t the concept of strong federa lism.
Discuss.
[200 words] ) 2111;
3 .. The 'Powers, Privileges and Immu nities
of Parlia ment and its Members' as envi saged in Articl e 105 of the Const itution
leave room for a large numb er of uncodifi ed and un-en umera ted privil eges
to contin ue. Assess the reason s for the
absen ce of legal codifi cation of the
'parlia menta ry privile ges'. How can this
proble m be addressed?
(200 words] lZlh
4. What do you under stand by the conce pt
'freed om of speec h and ex press ion '?
Does it cover hate speec h also? Why do
the films in India stand on a slight ly
differ ent plane from other forms of
expre ssion? Discuss. [200 words] )21Jz
5. Instan ces of Presid ent's delay in commu ting death senten ces h as come under
public debate as denial of justice. Shoul d
there be a time limit specif ied for the
Presid ent to accep t/ reject such petitions? Analy se.
[200 words] 12112
6. The size of the cabin et shoul d be as big
as gover nm en tal work justifies and as
big as the Prime Minis ter can ma nage
as a team. How far is th e effica cy of a
gover nment then inversely relate d to the
size of the cabin et? Discu ss.
(200 words] 121h
7. Natio nal HUm a n Rights Comm ission
(NHRC) in India can be most effective
when its tasks are adequ ately suppo rted
by other m echan isms that ensur e the
accou ntabil ity of a gover nment . In light
of the above observ ation assess the role
of NHRC as an effective comp lem ent
to the judici ary and other institu tions
in promo ting and protec ting huma ns
rights standa rds.
[200 words] 12112

t 20i5 TEST PAPER
1 . Discu ss the possib l e factor s that inhibi t

India from enact ing for its citi7..e ns a

797

unifor m civil code as provided for in the
Direct ive Princi ples of State Policy.
(200 words] 121h
2. The con cept of coope rative federa lism
has been increa singly emph asized in
recen t years. Highl ight the drawb acks
in the existi ng struct ure and the exten t
to which coope rati ve federa lism would
answe r the shortc omings.
(200 words ] lZlh
3. In absen ce of a well-e ducate d and organi zed local level gover nmen t-syst em,
'Panch ayats' and 'Samit is' have remai ned
mainl y politi cal institu tions and not
effect ive instru m ents of gover n an ce.
Critic ally discuss.
[200 words1 12th.
4. Khap Panch ayats have been in the news
for fun ctioni ng as extra- const itutio nal
autho rities, often delive ring prono uncem ents amou nting to huma n rights violation s, Discu ss critic ally the action s
taken by the legislative, execu tive and
the judici ary to set the things right in
thi s regard .
(200 words] 121h
5, Resort ing to ordina nces has always raised
con cern on violat ion of the spirit of separatio n of powers doctri ne. While noting
the ration al es justify ing the power to
promu lgate ordina nces, analy ze wheth er
th e decisi ons of the Supre me Court on
the issue have furthe r facilit ated resorting to this power. Shoul d the power to
promu lgate ordin ances be repea led?
(200 words] 12lh
6. What are the m ajor changes broug ht in
the Arbitr ation and Conci liation Act,
1996 throu gh the rece nt Ordin ance
promu lgated by lhe Presid ent? How far
will it impro ve India' s dispute resolu tion
m ech anism ? Discu ss.
(200 words] 121h
7, Does the right to clean enviro nmen t
entail legal regul ations on burni ng
cracke rs durin g Diwali? Discu ss in the
light of Articl e 21 of the Indi an Co nstitution and Judge m ent(s) of the Apex
Court in thi s regard .
(200 words] 12lh

798

P

Indian Polity

8 . Hif am e ndment bill to the Whistleblowers

Act, 2011 tabled in t he Parliament is
passed, there may be no one left to protect," Critica lly evaluate.
[200 words] \2 lh

t 2016 TEST PAPER

]. Discuss the essentia ls of the 69th Constitutional Amendment Act a nd anoma li es,
if any, that have led to recent reported
co nfli cts between the eJected represe ntatives and the in stitution of the Lieutenant
Governor in the administra tion of Delhi.
Do yo u think that this will give rise to
a new trend in the fun ction ing of the
Indian federal politics?
[200 words] 121h
2. 10 what extent is Article 370 of the Indian
Co n st it ut io n , beari ng marg in a l not e
"te mpora ry provision with res pec t to
the Sta te of Jammu and Kashm ir", temporary? Discuss the future prospects of
this provis ion in t1le co ntext of Indi an
polity.
[200 words] 121;'
3. "Th e Indian party syste m is passing
through a phase of transition whi c h
looks to be full of co n trad icti on s and
paradoxes/ Discuss. [200 wo rds} 12 IJz
4. Exercise of CAG 's powers in relation to
the accounts of the Un ion a nd the Sta tes
is derived fro m Artic1e 149 of the India n
Constitution. Discuss whether audit of
th e Govern m ent's poli cy imple mentation
co uld a mount to overstepping its own
(GAG) jurisdi ction.
[200 words] 121h
5. Discuss each adjective attached to th e
word 'Re publi c' in the 'Prea mbl e'. Are
they defendable in the prese nt circumstances?
[200 words] 121h
6. What was he ld in th e Coe lh o case? In
this co ntex t, ca n you say that judicial
review is of key importance amongst
the basi c features of the Co n stitution?
[200 words] J2 l h
7. Did t h e Gover nm e n t of I ndia Act,
1935 lay down a federal co nstitutio n ?
Disc uss.
1200 wordsJ J 2IJz

8 . What is qua si-judicial body? Explain
with th e h e lp of concrete examp les.
[200 words] 121;'
9. Evaluate the eco n om ic and strategic
dim e nsio ns of Ind ia's Look East po li cy
in the co ntext of the post Cold War inte rnation al sce nar io.
[200 words] 12 1fz

l2017TEST PAPER
).

~Th e local se lf-gover nm e nt system in
Indi a has not proved to be effective
instrument of govern ance". Criti ca ll y
exam ine th e state m e n t a nd give yo ur
views to im prove th e situation.
[150 words] 10
2 . Critica ll y exa min e the Supre me Co urt's
judgement on 'National Judicial Appointments Co mmission Act, 2014' with refere nce to appo intm ent of judges of higher
j udi ciary in India.
[150 words] 10
3. 'Simultaneous electi on to the Lok Sabha
a nd the State Assemb li es will limi t the
a mount of time and mon ey spe nt in
e lectioneering but it will reduce th e gov·
e rnme nt's accou ntab ility to the peopl e'
Discuss.
11 50 words] ]0
4. How do pressure groups influence Indi a n
politi ca l process? Do you agree with this
view tha t informa l pressure groups have
e merged as powerful tha n fonn a l pressure groups in recent years?
[I SO wo rds] 10
5. Disc u ss the role of Pub li c Acco unts
Com mittee in estab li shing acco untabili ty of th e governm e nt to the people.
[1 50 words] 10
6. Explain th e salient features of the
Const itution (One Hundred and First
Amendment) Act, 2016. Do you think
it is efficacious e nough ' to remove
cascading effect of taxes an d provide
for co mmon national market for goods
and se rvices'?
[250 words] 15
7. Exami ne the scope of Fundamental Rights
in the light of the latest judgement of
the Supreme Court on Right to Privacy.
[250 words] 15

UPSG qu'estioris~ oil Indian Polity General Studies-Mains i(J; J=162'i'
8. TIle indIan C6fiSflftiti6Ti has"pf'ov'lsldfis

f6f ijtifdlfig. j'6'1fit $'f%s'ion 6( the two
Houses: of ffie' Parliament. Efiuffierate
the oGcasionS~ when OilS' wo'u]d nofinally
happen and', ais'o tfie occaSIons when It.
canrio't, wIth reasons' tiiereOf:
(250 worcls] 15
9. TO enhance the quaHfY of'democra'cy in
India the :election Cofi1tiilssidff of'fndia
has pf6posed eiecftifa'] reforms In 2016.
What are tlie' sugg'esMli refdfms and how
fiif ate tHey s'lgrlJfkanf to m'ake dcmoer
raoy successflil?
[iSil ,Mfds] is

t.2018 TE~TPAPER
1. Iii tHe' light of fe'cent controverSy tegafdIhg the use of-Electronic' Voting MachInes
(EVMj; wiun are the Bilaifenges before
the E1ect16n QomfiiIssloti of lfitHa, to
ensure the tfu'stw6it·iiifieSs of elections
[lfid wards] 10
in india?
2. WHethe'f Nati6rUi1 QtHnm lssiOfi for
Scheduied Castes (J\lQSGJ) can efiforce
the tffip!ernetHation of cb11stltuti6ftal
reservatioii fiji tHe scHeduled Castes
ift tiie religIous mlnOfltY InstitUtions?
Examiiie,
[150 Words] 10
3 . Under wl1ai dfttiffistances aifi the FInan:
cial EmUgency be pfociaimed by the
President of ItitHit? WBat Goftseqtiences
f6i1ow wilen SliGh ~ dMlafatJoft remains
iii force?
(150 words] 10
4 . "Vhy a6 you think the comm itteeS
are cofisiaered to be tisefui fof parliamentary wOfl? DIst5UssJ iti this context;
tile rale or tile Estimates Committee;
(150 words] io
5. "Tile Qompitdiler and Auilitor Gefietal
(eAt'lj has a very vHai roie 10 piay."
Expiaift hcnv this is reflected in the
method and terms 6fliis aPPolfttrneht as
weil as the rafige of powers he can
exefdse,
[150 words] 10
6 . .Whether the SUpreme Court Judgement
(July 2(18) ean seHie . the !,oHtital
{lissie between the Lt, OaVeffiof and

799

ole'ded gdVemment. <If Delhi? Examine.

(250 wdrds] 15
7. How faf do you agree witli the view
that ufbli.rial§ Guttaii tlie' jUrlsdicfion of
ordinary courts? In view of tHe- above,
discuss the COffstitutiona:l vaHdhy and
cOifipefefity Of the ttibtinals in India.
[250 words] 15
8. How IS the Fitfartee Commission of
India cO'fiSfituted? What do yOU about
the tefms df tefett'nce df the recently
constItuted FlnaffCe Coniinissio:tl?
Ofscuss.[250 words] 15
9. Assess the iffij1dftaffce df Pahchayat
systetn in fndia: Its-a pa:rt' of16tal govefnmefit. Apart. frolft goverrttnertt grants,
wilat' sdufces: the Patichayats-can took out
for- fiffanc1rtg, developmental projects.
[250 words] 15
10. India aHci USA afe' two large democracies, ExamlHe the basic tenets on which
die two polIticai systems ate based.
1250 words] 15

t 20t9TEST PAPER
1.

e=

Do you think that cOHstitution of India
does fiot accept principle of strict sepa
fatIon of powers rather it is: based on
the principle of 'checks and balance'?
[150 words] Id
ExplaiH,
e

2 . "The Ce ntral Administration Tribunal

which was established for' tedI'essal
of gfievatices: and COrfipiairtts by Or
against eehtni govertlti'ient employees nowadays is exeftising its powers
as ali ifidepenrlent judicial atith6rity/
[150 WordS] 10
!'lxvl,IlI.
3. W1iat afe the methods used by tlte Fame'"
ofgafilzatlOtiS: to ififlUente the policymakers in India and hoW effective ate
Ihese methods?
[1 50 words] 10
4. FrOm the resolution. of contentious
Issues regarding distfibut.iofj of legislative powers by the coutts, 'principle of
redefiil Supremacy' ahd 'Harmonidus
Coftstflietlbfi' have emerged, Explain,
(150 word,] 10
j

800

..

1f7 Indian Polity

5. What can France learn from the Indian
Constitution's approach to secularism ?
[1 50 words] 10
6. On what grounds a peopl e's representative ca n be di squalifi ed under the
Repre se n tatio n of People Act , 1951?
Also mention the remedies avai labl e to
such person against his disqualification.
[250 words] 15
7. "Parliame nt's power to amend the Constitution is a limited power and it cannot
b e en larged into absol ute power." In the
light of this statement exp la in whether
Parliament under Article 368 of the
Constitution can destroy the Basic Structure of the Constitution by expanding its
l250 wordsl 15
a mending power?
8 . "Th e reservation of seats for women in
the institutions of local self- government
has had a limited impa ct on the patri·
archal character of the Indian Poli tical
Process." Com ment.
1250 wo rds} ] 5
9. "Th e Attorney-General is the chief legal
adviser and lawyer of the Governm ent
of Indi a." Discuss.
1250 words] 15
to. Ind ividual Parl iamentarian's ro le as
the national lawmaker is on a declin e,
which in turn, has adversely impacted
the qu ality of debates and their outcome. Discuss.
l2s0 wordsl IS

t 2020 TEST PAPER
1. ~There is a need for simpl ification of

procedure for disqualification of persons
found gui lty of corrupt pra cti ces under
t h e Representation of Peoples Act".
Co m ment.
[I SO words] 10
2 . "Recent amendments to the Right to Information Act will have profound impact
on the autonomy and independence of
th e In formation Commission". Discuss.
[1 50 words] 10
3. How far do you think cooperat ion, competition and confro nL:1tion have shaped
the nature of federation in India ? Cite
some recent examples to va lidate your
answer.
[ISO words ) ]0

4. The judicial systems in India and UK
seem to be co nverging as well as diverging in recent times. Highlight the key
poims of convergence and divergence
between the two nations in terms of their
jud icial practices.
[I SO words] ]0
S. 'Once a Spea ker, Always a Speaker'!
Do you think this practice shou ld be
adopted to impart object ivity to th e
office of the Speaker of Lok Sabha? What
could be its impl ications for the robust
functioning of parliamentary business
in India ?
l1 s0 words] IO
6. In dian Const itution ex hibits ce n tralising tendencies to maintain unity and
integrity of the nation . Eluc idate in the
perspect ive of t he Epidemic Diseases
Act, 1897; Th e Disaster Management Act,
2005 and recently pa ssed Farm Acts.
[250 words] 15
7. Judicia l Legi slation is antithetical to
the doct rine of sepa ration of powers as
envisaged in the Indian Constitution.
In thi s co ntext justify th e filing of large
number of publ ic interest petitions praying for issuing guidelines to executive
authorities.
[250 words] IS
8. Th e stre ngth and suste nan ce of loca l
institutions in In d ia has shifted from
their format i ve phase of 'Functions,
Functionaries and Funds' to the con·
temporary stage of 'F un ctio nalit y'.
Highlight the critical c hallenges fa ced
by local institutions in terms of their
fu nctiona li ty in recent times.
[250 wo rds] 15
9. Rajya $abha has been transformed from a
'useless step ney tyre' to the most usefu l
supporting organ in past few decades.
Highlight the factors as we ll as th e areas
in which t hi s transform at ion cou ld be
visible.
[250 words) 15
10. Which steps are required for constituti on·
a liza tion of a Co mmi ss ion ? Do you think
imparting co nsti tutionali ty to the National Commission for Wom e n would ensure
greate r gender justice a nd em powerment
in India ? Give reasons. [250 wordsl 15

f
UPSC Questions on Indion Polity (General Studies- Mains 2013-2022)

! 2021 TEST PAPER
1. 'Constitutional Morality' is rooted in the

Constitution itself and is founded on its
essential facets. E~plain .the doctrine of
'Constitutional Morality' with the help
of relevant judicial decisions.
[150 words] 10
2. Discuss the desirability of greater representation to women in the higher
judiciary to ensure diversity, equity and
inclusiveness.
[150 words] 10
3. How have the recommendations of the
14th Finance Commission of India
enabled the States to improve their fisca l
position?
[150 words] 10
4. Th what extent, in your view, the Parliament is able to ensure accountability
of the executive in India?
[1 50 words] 10
5. "Pressure groups playa vital role in influencing public policy making in India.~
Explain how the business associations
contribute to public policies.
[150 words] 10
6. The jurisdiction of the Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI) regarding lodging
an FIR and conducting probe within a
particular State is being questioned by
various States. However, the power of the
States to withhold consent to the CBI is
not absolute. Explain with specia l reference to the federal character of India.
[250 words] 15
7. Though the HUman Rights Commissions
have contributed immensely to the protection of human rights in India, yet
they have failed to assert themselves
against the mighty and powerful. Analyzing their structural and practical
limitations, suggest remedial measures.
[250 words] 15
8. Analyze the distinguishing 'f eatures of
the notion of Right to Equality in the
Constitutions of the USA and India.
[250 words] 15
9. Exp lain the constitutional provisions
under which Legislative Counc'ils are

801

established. Review the working and cur·
rent status of Legislative Councils with
suitabl e illustrations. [250 words] 15
10. Do Department·related Parliamentary
Standing Committees keep the administration on its toes and inspire reverence
for parliamentary control? Eva luate the
working of such committees with suitable examples.
[250 words] 15

! 2022TEST PAPER
1. "The most significant achievement of

modern law in India is the constitutionalization of environmental problems by
the Supreme Court." Discuss this statement with the help of relevant case laws.
[150 words] 10
2. "Right of movement and residence
throughout the territory of India are
free ly available to the Indian citizens,
but these rights are not absolute.~
Comment.
(150 words] 10
3. 1b what extent, in your opinion, has
the decentralisation of power in India
changed the governance landscape at
the grassroots?
[150 words] 10
4. Discuss the role of the Vice-President
of India as the Chairman of the Rajya
Sabha,
[150 words] 10
5. Discuss the role of the National Commission for Backward Classes in the wake of
its transformation from a sta.tutory body
to a constitutional body.
[150 words] 10
6. Discuss the procedures to decide the
disputes arising out of the election of
a Member of the Parliament or State
_Legislature under The Representation
of the People Act, 1951. What are the
grounds on which the election of any
returned candidate may be declared void?
What remedy is available to the aggrieved
party against the decision ? Refer to the
case laws.
[250 words] 15
7. Discuss the essential conditions for
exercise of the legislative powers by
the Governor. Discuss the legality of

"

802

P

Indian Polity

re·promulgation of ordinances by the
Governor without placing them before
the Legislature.
[250 words] 15
8 . "Whne the national political parties in
India favour centralisation, the regional

parties are in favour of State autonomy."

Comment.

[250 words]

15

9. Critica11y examine the procedures through
which the Presidents of India and
France are elected.
[250 words1 15
10. Discuss the role of the Election Commis·
sian of India in the light of the evolution
of the Model Code of Conduct.
[250 words] 15

,

Practice Questions on Indian Polity
(General Studies-Mains)

j QUESTIONS
LONG ANSWER TYPE
I.

•

Instructions: Answer the following questions.
Answer to each question should be in about
250 words. Each question carries 15 Marks.
1. How does the parliament exercise control
over the Union Executive? How can it be
made more effective?
2 . Explain the ways of acquiring and losing
Indian Citizenship.
3. Explain the right to freedom of religion
as envisaged in the Indian Constitution.
4. Evaluate the position ofthe President of
India.
5. Discuss the features of the party system
in India.
6. Describe th e procedure for the amend·
mellt of the Indian Constitution. What
are the criticisms level1ed against it?
7. Critical1y examine the extent to which
the Directive Principles of State Policy
have been implemented. What m e asures do you suggest for their better
implementation?
8. Explain the principles of Indian foreign
policy.
9. Critically examine the emergency powers
of the Indian President.
10. Describe the relative rol es of the Rajya
Sabha and the Lok Sabha in the Indian
Poli tical System.

11. Explain the jurisdiction and powers of the
Supreme Court.
12 . Explain the role played by the NIT! Aayog
in promoting the Cooperative Federal·
ism in India.
13. "The Indian Constitution is federal in
form but unitary in spirit". Discuss.

14. What is the need for promoting National
Integration in India? What measures do
you suggest in this regard?
15. Describe the various constitutional provisions for the protection and develop·
ment of women and children in India.
16. What has been the controversy regard·
ing the amendability of Fundamental
Rights? What constitutes the 'basic struc·
ture' of the Constitution?
17. What are the changes introduced in the
constitutional provisions with respect
to the centre-state financial relations by
the IOist Amendment Act? Explain.
18. Describe the various changes made in
the Constitution by the 42nd and 44th
Amendment Acts.
What
are the anti·defection provisions
19.
under the Constitution? What are the
recommendations of the National Com·
mission to Review the Working of the
Constitution in this regard?
20. What is a coalition government? What
has been its experience in India at the
central level?

I

804

t

,(:1 Indian Polity

II. SHORT ANSWER TYPE
QUESTIONS

Instructions: Answer the following q ucstions.
Answer to each question sho uld be in about
150 words. Each question ca rries 10 Ma rk s.
1. Describe the compositio n of the Constituent Assemb ly of India.
2, What are the con st itutional provis io ns
with respect to th e reorgan ization of
sta tes?
3. How does the writ jurisdiction of the
Supre m e Court differ from that of a
High Court?
4. How the Directive Principles differ from
t he Fundamental Rights?
5. Explain the ro le of regiona l parti es in
Indian Politi cs.
6. Describe the co mpo sition a nd functions
of a State Public Serv ice Co mmi ssio n .
7. Explain the idcals contain ed in the
Preamb le of the In d ian Co nstit ution.
8. Examine thc functio nin g of Judicial
Review in the Indian Political System.
9. "In dia is a secu lar state". Explain.
10. Exp lain the six freedom s guarantced
under Art icle 19 of the Const it uti on.
11. What is mcant by Pre si dent' s Rule ?
ExpLain.
12. Criti ca ll y examine th e disc retionary
powers of a St<ltC Governor.
13 . Describe the composition and fun ct ions
of the Na tional Com mi ssio n for Women.
14. What are th e unitary features of the
Indian Const itution ?
15 . Exp lain the procedure for the impeachment of the Pre sident.
16. What are the functions of the VicePres id e nt of Ind ia ? How does he differ
from the American Vice- Preside nt ?
] 7, What are the special powe rs enjoyed by
the Rajya Saba? Wha t is its utility?
18. Describe the powers and functions of the
Spea ker of Lok Sabha.
19. What is a 'cut motion'? What are its d ifferent kinds? What is its sign ificance?
20. How is the State Legi slati ve Assembly
supre me over the Sta te Leg isl ative
Cou n c il ?

21. What is the composit ion of the Finance
Co mmi ss ion? What are its fu-nct ions?
22 . Desc r ibe the feature s of the new
Panchayati Raj Syste m as i ntroduced
by the 73rd Amendme n t Act.
23. What is vot ing behaviour? Expl ain the
det er minants of vot ing behaviour in
India.
24. What is meant by 'Martia l Law' ? What
are the const itutional prov isio n s in this
regard ?
What are the c irculllsta nces under which
the Parliament can legis late on the State
Li st subjects?
26. What is 'Sove reignty of Parliament"! Is
Indian Parliament a sovere ign bo,i y?
27. What are the constitutional prov:slon s
with respect to the joint s itt ing (If the
two Hou ses of P<lrl ia menf!
28. Describe the ordinance-making power of
the President of I nel ia.
29. Who are l i ngu isti c minorit ies? Wh :! l are
the constitut ional sa feguards for t hem?
30. Describe the composition and fun ctions
of the Na tional Commission for Protect ion of Ch ild Rights.
31. What is meant by 'Cujral Doct 'ine '?
Explain.
32. Distinguish between 'Judicial Rev iew' and
'Ju dicial Ac ti vism',
33. Di scuss the benefits of the I.,ok Ai.alats.
34. \"'ha t is meant by th e 'Doctrine of Pith
and Substa nce'? What are its principles?
35. \"'hat is the present posit ion of the Right
to Property? Elaborate.
36 . How is the Vice -President of India
e lected? How is it different from the
e lection of the President of India "
37. What are the changes made in th.! constitution by the 42nd and 44th Amendment Acts with respect to the pO\\'ers of
the Pres ident in relation to th e C~ ntral
Cou n c il of Ministers?
38. Distinguish between Public Bill an d
Private Bill.
39. What arc the functions of the Zona l
COLinc ils'?
40. What is meant by the Doctr i ne of
'Colourable Leg islation "? What ~ rc it s
propositions?

