- Preface
    As a nation grows, it is bound to review its past to see what part of its legacy is relevant or an inhibiting factor for growth. The medieval period of Indian history has often been equated with the period of Turkish and Mughal rule over the country. This meant that primacy was given to political factors rather than societal ones. This attitude was also based on the assumption that there had been little change in Indian society over the centuries. This attitude has now begun to change. Historians have traced the evolution of tribe-based society in India to the rise of territorial states and the gradual formation of classes and castes within this state system. It has also been shown that with the growing trend toward ownership of land and the desire to dominate and control those engaged in cultivation, a new form of society arose— that is, the feudal mode. However, it has been recognized that there were vital differences between this social order and the feudal order in Europe.

    Without trying to investigate these differences in detail, an attempt has been made to trace the evolution of social, economic, political, and cultural trends in India from the eighth century to the end of the seventeenth century. It is a daunting task to bring all these aspects together in a single volume. This attempt has been made in the hope that the summation of the efforts of many historians during the last four decades to give a new orientation to medieval Indian history would stimulate public interest and also put into better perspective recent controversies regarding the nature of the state in medieval India, the extent of religious freedom for people within it, and the nature of economic growth during the period.

    A point has been made in the book that the emergence of large empires, followed by their breakdown into smaller components and vice versa, did not necessarily mean economic stagnation and cultural decay. Even when larger states emerged subsequently, there was often an active interchange between the new center and the regional states.

    Thus, Indian history is not just an endless story of the rise and fall of empires without any institutional and cultural growth, as Sir Charles Elliot had postulated in his introduction to the eight-volume History of India as Told by Its Own Historians. Indian history is a much more complex web, with the center of gravity shifting from north to east, or to the south, and back again. Finally, for a long period, the forces of growth triumphed under the Mughals over the forces of disintegration. The process of disintegration during the eighteenth century and a reintegration under vastly different circumstances under the British, along with its harmful consequences, have not been touched upon here.



- India and the World
    The thousand-year period between the eighth and the eighteenth century saw important changes in India and the world. New social and political forms arose in both Europe and Asia. These new forms also had profound effects on the thinking and living patterns of the people. These changes had an impact on India as well, since India had long-standing trade and cultural relations with countries around the Mediterranean Sea, and the various empires that arose in the area, including the Roman and Persian empires.

    Europe
        In Europe, the mighty Roman Empire had broken into two parts by the third quarter of the sixth century. The western part, with its capital at Rome, had been overwhelmed by the Slavic and Germanic tribes coming from Russia and Germany. These tribes came in many waves, indulging in a great deal of ravaging and plundering in the territories of the old Roman Empire. However, in course of time, these tribes settled down in different parts of Europe, profoundly changing the character of the old population, as well as the languages and patterns of government. The foundations of many modern European nations were laid during this period as a result of the commingling of these tribesmen with the local population.

        The eastern part of the old Roman Empire had its capital at Byzantium (or Constantinople). This empire, called the Byzantine Empire, included most of Eastern Europe, as well as modern Turkey, Syria, and North Africa, including Egypt. It continued many of the traditions of the Roman Empire, such as a strong monarchy and a highly centralized administration. However, in belief and ritual, it had many differences with the Catholic Church in the West, which had its headquarters at Rome. The church in the East was called the Greek Orthodox Church. It was due to its efforts, and those of the Byzantine rulers, that Russia was converted to Christianity.

        The Byzantine Empire was a large and flourishing empire that continued to trade with Asia after the collapse of the Roman Empire in the West. It created traditions of government and culture, many of which were later absorbed by the Arabs when they overran Syria and Egypt. It also acted as a bridge between Greco-Roman civilization and the Arab world, and later helped in the revival of Greek learning in the West. The empire disappeared finally in the middle of the fifteenth century when Constantinople fell to the Turks.

        For centuries after the collapse of the Roman Empire in the West, cities virtually disappeared in Western Europe. One cause of this was the absence of gold, which the Romans had obtained from Africa and used for trade with the Orient. The period between the sixth and tenth centuries was long called a ‘Dark Age’ by historians. However, this was also a period of agricultural expansion, which prepared the way for the revival of city life from the tenth century and the growth of foreign trade. Between the twelfth and fourteenth centuries, Western Europe was again able to attain a high level of prosperity. A notable feature of the period was the growth of science and technology, the growth of towns, and the establishment of universities in a number of cities, such as Padua and Milan in Italy. These universities played an important role in the growth of new learning and ideas, which eventually led to the Renaissance and the rise of a new Europe.

    Growth of Feudalism
        A new type of society and a new system of government arose in Western Europe following the breakup of the Roman Empire. The new order that gradually emerged is called feudalism. This is derived from the Latin word feudum, which in English became fief. In this society, the most powerful elements were the chiefs who, with their military following, dominated large tracts of land and also played an important role in government. The king was just like one of the more powerful feudal chiefs. Over time, the monarchy became stronger, and an attempt was made to limit the power of the chiefs, who constantly fought each other, leading to a state of social anarchy. One method of controlling this was for the king to swear the chiefs to an oath of loyalty to him as his vassals. In return, the king recognized the tract of land dominated by the chiefs as their fiefs. The chiefs, in turn, could appoint sub-chiefs as vassals and allot a tract of land out of their fief to them. The king could, in theory, resume the fief of a disloyal vassal, but in practice, this was rarely done. Thus, in the feudal system, government was dominated by a landed aristocracy. The aristocracy soon became hereditary and tried its best not to admit outsiders to its fold, but it was never a completely closed aristocracy, with disloyal chiefs being removed and new ones being appointed or rising to power.

        The feudal system is associated with two other features. The first is the system of serfdom. A serf was a peasant who worked on the land but could not change his profession, migrate to any other area, or marry without the permission of his lord or master. Associated with this system was the manor. The manor was the house or castle where the lord lived. In many European countries, large tracts of land were owned by the lords of these manors. A part of the land was cultivated by the lord directly with the help of serfs, who had to divide their time between cultivating their own fields and the fields of their master. The land belonged theoretically to the lord, and the serf had to pay him other dues in cash and kind. The lord of the manor also had the responsibility of maintaining law and order, dispensing justice, etc. Since there was a great deal of lawlessness in those days, even free peasants were sometimes prepared to accept the vassalage of the lord of the manor in return for protection.

        Some historians think that the system of serfdom and the manor system are vital parts of feudalism, and that it is wrong to speak of feudalism in societies where these two did not exist. In India, for instance, there was no serfdom and no manor system as such. But the local landed elements (samantas) exercised many of the powers of the feudal lords, and the peasantry was in a dependent position to them. In other words, what mattered was not whether the peasantry was formally free, but the manner and extent to which it could exercise its freedom. In many countries of Western Europe, the manor system and the system of labor dues by the peasants disappeared after the fourteenth century.

        The second feature associated with the feudal system in Europe is the system of military organization. The most typical symbol of the feudal system was the armored knight on horseback. Actually, the system of cavalry warfare can be traced back in Europe only to the eighth century. In Roman times, the chief wings of the army were the heavy and light infantry, armed with long spears and short swords. Horses were used to draw chariots in which the officers rode. It is generally believed that the mode of warfare changed with the arrival of the Arabs. The Arabs had a large supply of horses, and their swift movements and mounted archers made the infantry largely ineffective. The problem of developing and maintaining the organization needed for this new mode of warfare helped in the growth of feudalism in Europe. No king could hope to maintain out of his own resources the large body of cavalry that was needed, and to provide them with armor and equipment. Hence, the army was decentralized, assigning the responsibility of maintaining a fixed force of cavalry and infantry for the service of the king to the fief-holders.

        Cavalry warfare became the principal mode of warfare due to two inventions, which, though much older, began to be used on a large scale during this period. The first was the iron stirrup, which made it possible for a heavily armored person to sit firmly on a horse without falling off. It also made possible a cavalry charge with lances held tightly to the body without the rider being thrown off by the shock of the impact. The earlier device was either a wooden stirrup or a piece of rope, which only provided a toe hold. Another invention was a new type of harness that enabled a horse to draw twice the amount of load it pulled earlier. It is believed that both these inventions came to Europe from the East, possibly from East Asia. They spread in India from the tenth century onwards.

        Thus, many factors, political, economic, and military, were responsible for the growth of feudalism in Europe. Even when stronger governments emerged after the eleventh century, the tradition had become too strong for the king to easily reduce the power of the feudal chiefs.

        Apart from the system of feudalism, the pattern of life in Europe during what is called the medieval period was also shaped by the Christian Church. We have already referred to the role of the Greek Orthodox Church in the Byzantine Empire and in Russia. In the absence of a powerful empire in the West, the Catholic Church took on some of the functions of government as well. The Pope, who was the head of the Catholic Church, became not only a religious head but also a figure who exercised a great deal of political and moral authority. In Europe, as in West Asia and in India, the Medieval Age was an age of religion, and those who spoke on behalf of religion exercised a great deal of power and influence. With the help of grants of land from the princes and feudal chiefs, and donations from rich merchants, many monastic orders and monasteries were set up. Some of these orders, such as the Franciscans, served the needy and the poor. Many monasteries provided medical help, shelter for travelers, and served as centers for education and learning. In this way, the Catholic Church played an important role in the cultural life of Europe.

        However, some of the monasteries, which became exceedingly wealthy, began to behave like feudal lords. This led to internal discord and conflict with the rulers, who resented the worldly power of the Church and the Popes. This conflict was reflected in the Renaissance and Reform movements later on.

    THE ARAB WORLD
        The rise of Islam from the seventh century onwards was instrumental in uniting the warring Arab tribes into a powerful empire. The Arab empire, founded by the early caliphs, embraced, apart from Arabia, Syria, Iraq, Iran, Egypt, North Africa, and Spain.

        Following internal differences and civil war among the Arab tribes, in the middle of the eighth century, the caliph at Damascus was displaced, and a new dynasty, called the Abbasids, came to power. They set up their capital at the newly founded city of Baghdad. The Abbasids claimed to belong to the same tribe as the Prophet Muhammad and were, for that reason, considered holy. For about 150 years, the Abbasid empire was one of the most powerful and flourishing empires in the world. At its height, it included all the important centers of civilization in the area, such as parts of North Africa, Egypt, Syria, Iran, and Iraq. The Abbasids controlled not only some of the most important regions of West Asia and North Africa but also commanded the important trade routes linking the Mediterranean world with India. The safety and security that the Abbasids provided to these trade routes were key factors for the wealth and prosperity of the people in the area, as well as for the splendor and magnificence of the Abbasid court. The Arabs were keen merchants and quickly emerged as the most enterprising and wealthy merchants and seafarers in the world during the period. Numerous cities, with magnificent buildings, both private and public, arose. The standard of living and the cultural environment of the Arab towns could hardly be paralleled in any country in the world during this period. The Arabs also established the gold dinar and the silver dirham, which became the currency of trade all over the world. This was made possible by the Arab access to African gold. The Arabs also established double-entry bookkeeping, advanced accountancy, and large-scale and elaborate banking and credit systems, including bills of exchange (Aundis).

        The most famous caliphs of this period were al-Mamun and Harun al-Rashid. The splendor of their court and their palaces, along with their patronage of men of science and learning, became subjects of numerous stories and legends. During the early period, the Arabs displayed a remarkable capacity for assimilating the scientific knowledge and administrative skills of the ancient civilizations they had overrun. For managing the administration, they had no hesitation in employing non-Muslims, such as Christians and Jews, and also non-Arabs, particularly the Iranians, many of whom were Zoroastrians or even Buddhists. Although the Abbasid caliphs were orthodox Muslims, they opened wide the gates of learning from all quarters as long as it did not challenge the fundamental tenets of Islam. The Caliph al-Mamun set up a “House of Wisdom” (Bayt al-Hikma) at Baghdad for translating into Arabic the learning from various civilizations—Greek, Byzantine, Egyptian, Iranian, and Indian. The example set by the Caliphs was followed by individual nobles. In a short space of time, almost all the important scientific works of various countries had become available in Arabic. We know a great deal about the impact of Greek science and philosophy on the Arabs, largely due to the work done in recent years by a devoted band of European scholars. We are also beginning to have a better idea of the impact of Chinese science and philosophy on the Arab world. Many Chinese inventions, such as the compass, paper, printing, gunpowder, and even the humble wheelbarrow, traveled from China to Europe via the Arabs during this period. The famous Venetian traveler, Marco Polo, traveled to China in order to know more about it and to breach the Arab monopoly of Europe’s trade with China.

        Unfortunately, we have only a limited knowledge of India’s economic and cultural relations with the Arab world during this period and India’s scientific contribution to it. After its conquest by the Arabs in the eighth century, Sind became a conduit for scientific and cultural links between India and the Arab world. The decimal system, which is the basis of modern mathematics and which had developed in India in the fifth century, traveled to the Arab world during this period. During the ninth century, it was popularized in the region by the Arab mathematician al-Khwarizmi. It was introduced to Europe in the twelfth century by a monk, Abelard, and became known as the system of Arab numerals. Many Indian works dealing with astronomy and mathematics were also translated into Arabic. The famous work on astronomy, Surya Siddhanta, which had been revised and reformed by Aryabhata, was one of these. Works by Charak and Sushruta dealing with medicine were also translated. Indian traders and merchants continued to visit the markets of Iraq and Iran, and Indian physicians and master-craftsmen were received at the caliph’s court at Baghdad. A number of Sanskrit literary works, such as Kalila wa Dimna (Panchatantra), were also translated into Arabic and formed the basis of Aesop’s Fables in the West. A more detailed study of the impact of Indian sciences and philosophy on the Arab world, and of Arab sciences on India, is now being made.

        By the beginning of the tenth century, the Arabs had reached the stage where they could make their own contributions to various sciences. The growth of geometry, algebra, geography, astronomy, optics, chemistry, medicine, etc., in the Arab world during this period made it the leader in the field of science. The writings of Arab geographers and their maps advanced knowledge about the world. The Arabs also helped to develop new devices for traveling across the open sea. These devices continued to be used until the fifteenth century. The accounts of Arab traders about India and the neighboring countries during this period are a useful source of information for us.

        Some of the best-stocked libraries in the world, as well as the leading scientific laboratories, were established in the Arab world during this period. However, it is necessary to remember that many of these achievements were the result of work done by people outside Arabia, in Khurasan, Egypt, Spain, etc. Arab science was truly international. It has been called “Arab science” because Arabic was the language of literature and thought in the entire area, and people from various countries could move freely and work or settle down anywhere they liked. The remarkable degree of intellectual and personal freedom enjoyed by scientists and scholars, as well as the patronage extended to them, was an important factor in the remarkable growth of Arab science and civilization. Such freedom was not common everywhere.

        Perhaps, conditions in India were similar, for hardly any of the Arab sciences could filter into India, and the growth of Indian science slowed down during this period.

        Arab science began to decline after the twelfth century, partly due to political and economic developments affecting the area, but even more due to growing orthodoxy which stifled free thought. However, it continued to grow in Spain until the fourteenth century.

    AFRICA
        The Arabs also brought Africa more closely into the Indian Ocean and Middle Eastern trade. Arab migrations and mercantile activity along the east coast of Africa increased enormously, extending up to Malindi, Zanzibar, etc. However, the Arab trade included the large-scale export of slaves, as well as gold, ivory, etc. There was in Africa a powerful Ethiopian kingdom of long standing, which had many towns. The Ethiopians were engaged in the Indian Ocean trade across Aden to India. The Ethiopians, called Habshis, were Christians. They were closely allied with the Byzantine empire in the Indian Ocean trade. Their economic position weakened with the decline of the Byzantine empire.

    EAST AND SOUTHEAST ASIA
        China’s society and culture had attained a climax in the eighth and ninth centuries under Tang rule. The Tang rulers extended their overlordship over large parts of Sinkiang in Central Asia, including Kashgar. This helped in giving a fillip to the overland trade across what is called the Silk Road. Not only silk, but fine quality porcelain and works in jade—a semi-precious stone—were exported to West Asia, Europe, and India across this road. Foreign traders were welcome in China. Many of them—Arabs, Persians, and Indians—came to South China, across the land and the seas, and settled down in Canton.

        The Tang empire declined in the middle of the ninth century and was replaced in the tenth century by another dynasty, the Song, which ruled over China for about one hundred years. Its growing weakness gave an opportunity to the Mongols to conquer China in the thirteenth century. The Mongols wrought great death and destruction in China. But due to their highly disciplined and mobile cavalry forces, the Mongol rulers were able to unify north and south China under one rule for the first time. For some time, they also brought under their sway Tonkin (north Vietnam) and Annam (south Vietnam). In the north, they overran Korea. Thus, the Mongols established one of the largest empires in East Asia.

        The Venetian traveler, Marco Polo, who spent some time at the court of Kublai Khan, the most famous of the Mongol rulers of China, has left a picturesque account of his court. Marco Polo returned to Italy by sea, visiting Malabar in India on the way. Thus, different parts of the world were already coming closer together, and their commercial and cultural contacts were increasing.

        The countries of Southeast Asia had to meet the expansionist urges of some of the Chinese rulers, China having developed a strong navy by this time. But during most of the time, the Southeast Asian states remained independent. The two most powerful kingdoms which flourished in the region during the period were the Sailendra and Kambuja empires.

        The Sailendra dynasty, which arose in the seventh century and constituted the Sri Vijaya empire, flourished until the tenth century. At its height, the empire included Sumatra, Java, the Malaya Peninsula, parts of Siam (modern Thailand), and even the Philippines. According to a ninth-century Arab writer, the empire was so large that even the fastest vessel could not complete a round trip of it in two years. The Sailendra rulers had a powerful navy and dominated the sea trade to China. The Sri Vijaya empire was replaced by the Majapahit empire in the eleventh century. It further extended the limits of the Sri Vijaya empire and continued until the fourteenth century. The Pallavas of South India also had a powerful navy. The Pallava navy was especially active in the Bay of Bengal. The sea trade with the countries of Southeast Asia and China was so important that in the tenth century, a Chola ruler sent a series of naval expeditions to Sumatra and Malaya to keep the sea lanes of communication open. Since the early centuries of the Christian era and even before, India had close trade and cultural contacts with the countries of the area. Many Chinese and Indian scholars visited Palembang, the capital of the empire, which was located in Sumatra and had been a Sanskrit and Buddhist center of study even earlier. The rulers built magnificent temples during the period, the most famous of them being the temple of Borobudur in East Java, dedicated to the Buddha. It is a whole mountain carved into nine stone terraces, surmounted by a stupa. Indian epics, such as the Ramayana and the Mahabharata, are displayed in the panels of the temple. These epics continued to provide the themes for literature, folk art, puppet plays, etc.

        The Kambuja empire extended over Cambodia and Annam (southern Vietnam) and replaced the Hinduized kingdom of Funan, which had dominated the area earlier. The Kambuja empire flourished until the fifteenth century and attained a high level of cultural development and prosperity. Its most magnificent achievement may be considered the group of temples near Angkor Thom in Cambodia. Begun in the tenth century, each ruler built a new temple there to commemorate his memory, until about two hundred temples were built in an area of 3.2 square kilometers. Of these, the largest is the temple of Angkor Wat. It has three kilometers of covered passages containing beautiful statues of Hindu gods, goddesses, and nymphs (apsaras), and skillfully executed panels containing scenes from the Ramayana and the Mahabharata. This entire group of buildings had been completely forgotten by the outside world and was largely taken over by the jungle until it was “discovered” by a Frenchman in 1860. It is interesting to note that the most vigorous period of temple building activity was from the tenth to the twelfth century, which was also the most magnificent period of temple building activity in India.

        Many Indian traders went to South China, after traveling overland from the port of Takkala in the Malaya Peninsula to the South China Sea. Many Brahmins, and later Buddhist monks, settled in countries of Southeast Asia and South China. Buddhism traveled from China to Korea and Japan. Indian monks reached Korea and influenced the evolution of a Korean script close to the Indian one. While Buddhism declined in India, it continued to flourish in Southeast Asia. In fact, it assimilated the Hindu gods into the Buddhist fold and even took over the Hindu temples—a movement opposite to what was happening in India at that time.

        Thus, India had close commercial and cultural contacts with the West, Southeast Asia, China, as well as Madagascar and countries on the east coast of Africa. The various kingdoms in Southeast Asia acted as a bridge for commercial and cultural contacts between India and China, and the outside world. Though deeply influenced by Indian civilization and culture, they were able to attain a distinctive culture of their own, of a very high order. Arab traders, who had been trading with South India and the countries of Southeast Asia earlier, became even more active after the establishment of the Abbasid empire. But the Arabs did not displace the Indian traders and preachers. In the early phase, they did not make any special effort to convert the people of the area to Islam. Thus, a remarkable degree of religious freedom and tolerance, and the commingling of various cultures, marked these countries, a characteristic they have retained even today. The conversion of Indonesia and Malaya to Islam took place gradually after Islam had consolidated its position in India. Elsewhere, Buddhism continued to flourish. Commercial and cultural contacts between India and these countries were snapped only with the establishment of Dutch rule in Indonesia, English rule in India, Burma, and Malaya, and later French rule in Indo-China.

- Northern India: Age of the Three Empires (800-1000)
    After the decline of Harsha’s empire in the seventh century, a number of large states arose in North India, the Deccan, and South India. Unlike the Gupta and Harsha’s empires in North India, none of the other kingdoms in North India were able to bring the entire Ganga valley under their control. The Ganga valley, with its population and other resources, was the basis on which the Gupta rulers and Harsha had been able to extend their control over Gujarat, which, with its rich sea ports and manufacturers, was important for overseas trade. Malwa and Rajasthan were the essential links between the Ganga valley and Gujarat. This defined the geographical limits of an empire in North India. In South India, the Cholas were able to bring the Krishna, Godavari, and the Kaveri deltas under their control. This was the basis of their supremacy in South India.

    Large states arose in North India and the Deccan between c. 750 and 1000. These were the Pala Empire, which dominated eastern India till the middle of the ninth century; the Pratihara Empire, which dominated western India and the upper Gangetic valley till the middle of the tenth century; and the Rashtrakuta Empire, which dominated the Deccan and also controlled territories in North and South India at various times. Each of these empires, although they fought among themselves, provided stable conditions of life over large areas, extended agriculture, built ponds and canals, and gave patronage to arts and letters, including temples. Of the three, the Rashtrakuta Empire lasted the longest. It was not only the most powerful empire of the time but also acted as a bridge between North and South India in economic as well as cultural matters.

    The Struggle for Domination in North India: The Palas
        The period following the death of Harsha was one of political confusion. For some time, Lalitaditya, the ruler of Kashmir, brought the Punjab under his control and even controlled Kanauj, which, since the days of Harsha, was considered the symbol of the sovereignty of North India—a position that Delhi was to acquire later. Control of Kanauj also implied control of the upper Gangetic valley and its rich resources in trade and agriculture. Lalitaditya even invaded Bengal (Gaud) and killed its reigning king. But his power waned with the rise of the Palas and the Gurjara-Pratiharas.

        The Palas and the Pratiharas clashed with each other for control of the area extending from Banaras to South Bihar, which again had rich resources and well-developed imperial traditions. The Pratiharas also clashed with the Rashtrakutas of the Deccan.

        The Pala Empire was founded by Gopala, probably in c. 750, when he was elected king by the notable men of the area to end the anarchy prevailing there. Gopala was not born into a high, much less a royal, family, his father probably being a soldier. He unified Bengal under his control and even brought Magadha (Bihar) under his control. Gopala was succeeded in c. 770 by his son, Dharampala, who ruled until c. 810. His reign was marked by a tripartite struggle between the Palas, the Pratiharas, and the Rashtrakutas for control of Kanauj and North India. The Pratihara ruler advanced upon Gaud (Bengal), but before a decision could be made, the Pratihara ruler was defeated by the Rashtrakuta ruler, Dhruva, and was forced to seek refuge in the deserts of Rajasthan. Dhruva then returned to the Deccan. This left the field free for Dharampala, who occupied Kanauj and held a grand darbar, which was attended by vassal rulers from Punjab, eastern Rajasthan, etc. We are told that the rule of Dharampala extended up to the furthest limit of India in the northwest and perhaps included Malwa and Berar. Apparently, this implied that the rulers of these areas accepted the suzerainty of Dharampala.

        The triumphal career of Dharampala may be placed between c. 790 and 800. Dharampala could not, however, consolidate his power in North India. The Pratihara power revived under Nagabhata II. Dharampala fell back but was defeated near Monghyr. Bihar and modern East Uttar Pradesh remained a bone of contention between the Palas and the Pratiharas. However, Bihar, in addition to Bengal, remained under the control of the Palas for most of the time.

        Failure in the North compelled the Pala rulers to turn their energies in other directions. Devapala, the son of Dharampala, who succeeded to the throne in c. 810 and ruled for 40 years, extended his control over Pragjyotishpur (Assam) and parts of Orissa. Probably a part of modern Nepal was also brought under Pala suzerainty.

        Thus, for about a hundred years, from the middle of the eighth to the middle of the ninth century, the Pala rulers dominated eastern India. For some time, their control extended up to Varanasi. Their power is attested to by an Arab merchant, Sulaiman, who visited India in the middle of the ninth century and wrote an account of it. He calls the Pala Kingdom Ruhma (or Dharma, short for Dharmapala), and says that the Pala ruler was at war with his neighbors, the Pratiharas and the Rashtrakutas, but his troops were more numerous than his adversaries. He tells us that it was customary for the Pala king to be accompanied by a force of 50,000 elephants, and that 10,000–15,000 men in his army were employed in fulling and washing clothes. Even if these figures may be exaggerated, we can assume that the Palas had a large military force at their disposal. But we do not know whether they had a large standing army or whether their forces consisted largely of feudal levies. Information about the Palas is also provided to us by Tibetan chronicles, although these were written in the seventeenth century. According to these, the Pala rulers were great patrons of Buddhist learning and religion. The Nalanda University, which had been famous all over the eastern world, was revived by Dharampala, and 200 villages were set apart for meeting its expenses. He also founded the Vikramasila University, which became second only to Nalanda in fame. It was located on the top of a hill, on the banks of the Ganga in Magadha, amidst pleasant surroundings. The Palas built many viharas in which a large number of Buddhist monks lived.

        The Pala rulers also had close cultural relations with Tibet. The noted Buddhist scholars, Santarakshita and Dipankara (called Arisa), were invited to Tibet, and they introduced a new form of Buddhism there. As a result, many Tibetan Buddhists flocked to the universities of Nalanda and Vikramasila for study. Although the Palas were supporters of Buddhism, they also extended their patronage to Shaivism and Vaishnavism. They gave grants to large numbers of Brahmins from North India who flocked to Bengal. Their settlements helped in the extension of cultivation in the area and the transformation of many pastoralists and food-gatherers into settled cultivation. The growing prosperity of Bengal helped in extending trade and cultural contacts with countries of Southeast Asia—Burma, Malaya, Java, Sumatra, etc.

        Trade with Southeast Asia was very profitable and greatly added to the prosperity of the Pala Empire and led to the incursion of gold and silver from these countries into Bengal. The powerful Sailendra dynasty, which was Buddhist in faith and ruled over Malaya, Java, Sumatra, and the neighboring islands, sent many embassies to the Pala court and sought permission to build a monastery at Nalanda. They also requested the Pala ruler, Devapala, to endow five villages for its upkeep. The request was granted and bears testimony to the close relations between the two empires.

    The Pratiharas
        The Pratiharas, who ruled over Kanauj for a long time, are also called Gurjara-Pratiharas. Most scholars believe that they originated from the Gurjaras, who were pastoralists and fighters, similar to the Jats. The Pratiharas established a series of principalities in central and eastern Rajasthan. They clashed with the Rashtrakutas for control of Malwa and Gujarat, and later for Kanauj, which implied control of the upper Ganga valley.

        The Pratiharas, who initially had their capital at Bhinmal, gained prominence under Nagabhatta I, who offered strong resistance to the Arab rulers of Sind, who were attempting to encroach on Rajasthan, Gujarat, and the Punjab. The Arabs made a significant push toward Gujarat but were decisively defeated by the Chalukyan ruler of Gujarat in 738. Although small Arab incursions continued, the Arabs ceased to be a major threat thereafter.

        The efforts of the early Pratihara rulers to extend their control over the upper Ganga valley and Malwa were thwarted by the Rashtrakuta rulers Dhruva and Gopal II. In 790 and again in 806-07, the Rashtrakutas defeated the Pratiharas and then withdrew to the Deccan, leaving the field open for the Palas. The Rashtrakutas’ primary interest appeared to be domination over Malwa and Gujarat.

        The real founder of the Pratihara empire and the greatest ruler of the dynasty was Bhoja. We do not know much about Bhoja’s early life or when he ascended the throne. However, he rebuilt the empire, and by about AD 836, he had recovered Kanauj, which remained the capital of the Pratihara empire for nearly a century.

        Bhoja tried to extend his influence in the east but was defeated by the Pala ruler, Devapala. He then focused on central India, the Deccan, and Gujarat, leading to a renewed struggle with the Rashtrakutas. In a bloody battle on the banks of the Narmada, Bhoja managed to retain control over large parts of Malwa and some parts of Gujarat, but he could not progress further into the Deccan. According to an inscription, his territories extended to the western side of the Sutlej River.

        Arab travelers tell us that the Pratihara rulers had the best cavalry in India. Import of horses from Central Asia and Arabia was a significant aspect of India’s trade at the time. After the death of Devapala and the weakening of the Pala empire, Bhoja extended his empire in the east.

        Bhoja’s name is famous in legends. His adventures in the early part of his life, his gradual reconquest of his lost empire, and his eventual recovery of Kanauj captured the imagination of his contemporaries. Bhoja was a devotee of Vishnu and adopted the title ‘Adivaraha,’ which has been found inscribed on some of his coins. He is sometimes called Mihir Bhoja to distinguish him from Bhoja Paramara of Ujjain, who ruled slightly later. Bhoja probably died around 885 and was succeeded by his son, Mahendrapala I.

        Mahendrapala, who ruled until about 908-09, maintained Bhoja’s empire and extended it to include Magadha and northern Bengal. His inscriptions have been found in Kathiawar, eastern Punjab, and Awadh. Mahendrapala fought a battle with the king of Kashmir but had to cede some of the territories in Punjab that Bhoja had won.

        The Pratiharas dominated north India for over a hundred years, from the early ninth to the middle of the tenth century. Al-Masudi, a native of Baghdad, visited Gujarat in 915-16 and attested to the great power and prestige of the Pratihara rulers. He referred to the Gurjara-Pratihara kingdom as al-Juzr (a corrupted form of Gurjara), and the king as Baura, likely a mispronunciation of Adivaraha, the title used by Bhoja. According to Al-Masudi, the empire of Juzr contained 180,000 villages, cities, and rural areas, and spanned about 2000 km in length and 2000 km in breadth. The king’s army was divided into four divisions, each consisting of 700,000 to 900,000 men, who fought against the ruler of Multan, other Muslims, the Rashtrakutas in the south, and the Palas in the east. Despite having only 2000 trained war elephants, the Pratiharas had the best cavalry in India.

        The Pratiharas were patrons of learning and literature. The great Sanskrit poet and dramatist, Rajashekhar, lived at the court of Mahipala, a grandson of Bhoja. The Pratiharas also embellished Kanauj with many fine buildings and temples.

        During the eighth and ninth centuries, many Indian scholars went with embassies to the court of the Caliph at Baghdad. These scholars introduced Indian sciences, especially mathematics, algebra, and medicine, to the Arab world. While the Pratiharas were known for their hostility to the Arab rulers of Sind, it seems that the movement of scholars and goods between India and West Asia continued during this period.

        Between 915 and 918, the Rashtrakuta king, Indra III, attacked Kanauj again and devastated the city. This weakened the Pratihara empire, and Gujarat likely passed into the hands of the Rashtrakutas. Al-Masudi tells us that the Pratihara empire had no access to the sea. The loss of Gujarat, which was central to overseas trade and the main outlet for north Indian goods to West Asian countries, was another blow to the Pratiharas. Another Rashtrakuta ruler, Krishna III, invaded north India in about 963 and defeated the Pratihara ruler, which led to the rapid dissolution of the Pratihara empire.

    The Rashtrakutas
        While the Palas and the Pratiharas were ruling over north India, the Deccan was ruled by the Rashtrakutas, a remarkable dynasty that produced a long line of warriors and able administrators. The kingdom was founded by Dantidurga, who established his capital at Manyakhet (or Malkhed) near modern-day Sholapur. The Rashtrakutas soon dominated the entire area of northern Maharashtra. They also engaged in conflict with the Pratiharas over the overlordship of Gujarat and Malwa, as previously noted. Although their raids did not result in the extension of the Rashtrakuta empire to the Ganga valley, they brought rich plunder and added to the fame of the Rashtrakutas.

        The Rashtrakutas also fought constantly against the Eastern Chalukyas of Vengi (in modern Andhra Pradesh) and in the south against the Pallavas of Kanchi and the Pandyas of Madurai.

        The greatest Rashtrakuta rulers were Govinda III (793–814) and Amoghavarsha (814–878). After a successful expedition against Nagabhatta of Kanauj and the annexation of Malwa, Govinda III turned to the south. An inscription tells us that Govinda “terrified the Kerala, Pandya, and Chola kings and caused the Pallavas to wither.” He defeated the Ganga (of Karnataka) kings, binding them in fetters and causing their death. The king of Lanka and his minister, who had neglected their interests, were captured and brought to Halapur as prisoners.

        Amoghavarsha ruled for 64 years but, by temperament, preferred the pursuit of religion and literature to war. He was an author and credited with writing the first Kannada book on poetics. He was also a great builder and is said to have made the capital city of Manyakhet excel the city of Indra.

        There were many rebellions in the far-flung Rashtrakuta empire under Amoghavarsha. These were barely contained and resurfaced after his death. His grandson, Indra III (915–927), re-established the empire. After the defeat of Mahipala and the sack of Kanauj in 915, Indra III became the most powerful ruler of his time.

        According to Al-Masudi, who visited India during that time, the Rashtrakuta king, Bathara (or Vallabharaja), was the greatest king of India. Most Indian rulers accepted his suzerainty and respected his envoys. He possessed large armies and numerous elephants.

        Krishna III (934–963) was the last in a line of brilliant rulers. He struggled against the Paramaras of Malwa and the Eastern Chalukyas of Vengi. He also launched a campaign against the Chola ruler of Tanjore, who had supplanted the Pallavas of Kanchi. Krishna III defeated the Chola king, Parantaka I, in 949 and annexed the northern part of the Chola empire. He then pressed down to Rameshwaram, set up a pillar of victory, and built a temple. After his death, all his opponents united against his successor, and the Rashtrakuta capital, Malkhed, was sacked and burnt in 972. This marked the end of the Rashtrakuta empire.

        The Rashtrakuta rule in the Deccan lasted almost two hundred years, until the end of the tenth century. The Rashtrakuta rulers were tolerant of religious diversity and patronized not only Saivism and Vaishnavism but also Jainism. The famous rock-cut temple of Siva at Ellora was built by one of the Rashtrakuta kings, Krishna I, in the ninth century. His successor, Amoghavarsha, is said to have been a Jain, but he also patronized other faiths. The Rashtrakutas allowed Muslim traders to settle and permitted Islam to be preached in their dominions. We are told that the Muslims had their own headman and large mosques for their daily prayers in many coastal towns within the Rashtrakuta empire. This tolerance policy helped promote foreign trade, which enriched the Rashtrakutas.

        The Rashtrakuta kings were great patrons of the arts and letters. Their courts featured not only Sanskrit scholars but also poets and writers who composed in Prakrit and Apabhramsha, the so-called corrupt languages that were the forerunners of modern Indian languages. The great Apabhramsha poet, Svayambhu, and his son, probably lived at the Rashtrakuta court.

    Political Ideas and Organization
        The system of administration in these empires was based on the ideas and practices of the Gupta Empire, Harsha’s kingdom in the north, and the Chalukyas in the Deccan. As before, the monarch was the center of all affairs. He was the head of the administration as well as the commander-in-chief of the armed forces. He sat in a magnificent darbar. Squadrons of infantry and cavalry were stationed in the courtyard. Captured war-elephants and horses were paraded before him. He was attended by royal chamberlains, who regulated the coming and going of vassal chiefs, feudatories, ambassadors, and other high officials who regularly waited on the king. The king also dispensed justice. The court was not only a center of political affairs and justice but also of cultural life. Dancing girls and skilled musicians attended the court. Women of the king’s household also attended the darbar on festive occasions. In the Rashtrakuta Empire, according to Arab writers, women did not veil their faces.

        The king’s position was generally hereditary. Thinkers of the time emphasized absolute loyalty and obedience to the king because of the insecurity of the times. Wars were frequent between kings and between kings and their vassals. While kings strove to maintain law and order within their kingdoms, their arms rarely extended far enough. Vassal rulers and autonomous chiefs often limited the area of the king’s direct administration, although the kings adopted high-sounding titles such as Maharajadiraj, Param-bhattaraka, etc., and claimed to be chakravartin, or supreme ruler of all Indian rulers. A contemporary writer, Medhatithi, thought that it was the right of an individual to bear arms in order to defend himself against thieves and assassins. He also believed it was right to oppose an unjust king. Thus, the extreme view of royal rights and privileges, put forward mainly in the Puranas, was not accepted by all thinkers.

        The rules about succession were not rigidly fixed. The eldest son often succeeded, but there are many instances when the eldest son had to fight his younger brothers, and sometimes lost to them. Thus, the Rashtrakuta rulers Dhruva and Govinda IV deposed their elder brothers. Sometimes, rulers designated the eldest son or another favorite son as their Yuvaraj (successor). In that case, the Yuvaraj stayed at the capital and helped in the task of administration. Younger sons were sometimes appointed provincial governors. Princesses were rarely appointed to government posts, but we do have an instance when a Rashtrakuta princess, Chandrobalabbe, a daughter of Amoghavarsha I, administered the Raichur Doab for some time.

        Kings were generally advised by a number of ministers. The ministers were chosen by the king, generally from leading families. Their position was often hereditary. Thus, in the case of the Pala kings, we hear that a Brahmin family supplied four successive chief ministers to Dharmapala and his successors. In such cases, the minister could become very powerful. Although we hear of a number of departments in the central government, we do not know how many of them there were or how they worked. From epigraphic and literary records, it appears that in almost every kingdom, there was a minister of correspondence (which included foreign affairs), a revenue minister, treasurer, chief of the armed forces (senapati), chief justice, and purohita. More than one post could be combined in one person, and perhaps one of the ministers was considered the chief or leading minister on whom the king relied more than the others. All the ministers, except the purohita, were expected to lead military campaigns when called upon to do so. We also hear of officials of the royal household (aatakpur). Since the king was the fountainhead of all power, some of the officers of the household became very powerful.

        The armed forces were very important for the maintenance and expansion of the empire. We have already cited evidence from Arab travelers that the Pala, Pratihara, and Rashtrakuta kings had large and well-organized infantry and cavalry, and large numbers of war-elephants. Elephants were considered symbols of strength and were greatly prized. The largest number of elephants was maintained by the Pala kings. Large numbers of horses were imported both by Rashtrakuta and Pratihara kings by sea from Arabia and West Asia, and over land from Khurasan (east Persia) and Central Asia. The Pratihara kings are believed to have had the finest cavalry in the country. There are no references to war-chariots, as they had fallen out of use. Some of the kings, especially the Rashtrakutas, had a large number of forts. These were garrisoned by special troops and had their own independent commanders. The infantry consisted of regular and irregular troops, and of levies provided by the vassal chiefs. The regular troops were often hereditary and sometimes drawn from different regions all over India. Thus, the Pala infantry consisted of soldiers from Malwa, Khasa (Assam), Lata (south Gujarat), and Karnataka. The Pala kings, and perhaps the Rashtrakutas, had their own navies, but we do not know much about their strength and organization.

        The empires consisted of areas administered directly and areas ruled over by the vassal chiefs. The latter were autonomous as far as their internal affairs were concerned and had a general obligation of loyalty, paying a fixed tribute, and supplying a quota of troops to the overlord. Sometimes, a son of a vassal chief was required to stay in attendance of the overlord to guard against rebellion. The vassal chiefs were required to attend the darbar of the overlord on special occasions, and sometimes they were required to marry one of their daughters to the overlord or to one of his sons. But the vassal chiefs always aspired to be independent, and wars between them and the overlord were frequent. Thus, the Rashtrakutas had to fight constantly against the vassal chiefs of Vengi (Andhra) and Karnataka; the Pratiharas had to fight against the Paramaras of Malwa and the Chandellas of Bundelkhand.

        The directly administered territories in the Pala and Pratihara empires were divided into baukti (provinces) and mandata or visaya (districts). The governor of a province was called uparika, and the head of a district, visayapati. The uparika was expected to collect land revenue and maintain law and order with the help of the army. The visayapati was expected to do the same within his jurisdiction. During this period, there was an increase in smaller chieftains, called semantas or bhogapatis, who dominated a number of villages. The visayapatis and these smaller chiefs tended to merge with each other, and later on the word samanta began to be used indiscriminately for both of them.

        In the Rashtrakuta kingdom, the directly administered areas were divided into rashira (provinces), visaya, and bhuke. The head of rashira was called rashtrapasi, and he performed the same functions as the uparika did in the Pala and Pratihara empires. The visaya was like a modern district, and the dhwAei was a smaller unit within it. In the Pala and Pratihara empires, the unit below the visaya was called parzaia. The precise role of these smaller units is not known, but it seems their main purpose was the realization of land revenue and some attention to law and order. Apparently, all the officials were paid by granting them rent-free land. This tended to blur the distinction between local officials and hereditary chiefs or smaller vassals. Similarly, the rashirapati or governor sometimes enjoyed the status and title of a vassal king.

        Below these territorial divisions was the village. The village was the basic unit of administration. The village administration was carried out by the village headman and the village accountant, whose posts were generally hereditary. They were paid by grants of rent-free land.

        The headman was often helped in his duties by the village elders called grama mahajana or grama mahatteara. In the Rashtrakuta kingdom, particularly in Karnataka, we are told that there were village committees to manage local schools, tanks, temples, and roads. These committees could also receive money or property in trust and manage them. These sub-committees worked in close cooperation with the headman and received a percentage of the revenue collection. Simple disputes were also decided by these committees. Towns had similar committees, to which the heads of trade guilds were also associated. Law and order in the towns and in areas within their immediate vicinity was the responsibility of the koshia pata or kotwel—a figure made familiar through many stories.

        An important feature of the period was the rise of hereditary revenue officers called nad gavundas or desa gramakutas. They appear to have discharged the same functions as the deshmukhs and deshpandes of later times in Maharashtra. This development, along with the petty chieftainships in north India, had an important bearing on society and politics. As the power of these hereditary elements grew, the village committees became weaker. The central ruler also found it difficult to assert his authority over them and control them. This is what we mean when we say that the government was becoming ‘feudalized.’

        Another point to bear in mind is the relationship of the state and religion during this time. Many of the rulers were devout followers of Shiva or Vishnu, or they followed the teachings of Buddhism or Jainism. They made handsome donations to the Brahmans, the Buddhist viharas, or Jain temples. But, generally, they gave patronage to all faiths and did not persecute anyone for his or her religious beliefs. Muslims were also welcomed and allowed to preach their faith by the Rashtrakuta kings. Normally, a king was not expected to interfere with the customs, or with the code of conduct prescribed by the law books called the Dharmashastras. But he did have the general duty of protecting Brahmans and maintaining the division of society into four states or varnas. The purohita was expected to guide the king in this matter. But it should not be thought that the purohita interfered with state affairs or dominated the king. Medhatithi, the foremost expounder of Dharmashastra in this period, says that the king’s authority was derived both from the Dharmashastras, including the Vedas, and from the Arthashastra or the science of polity. His public duty or rajadharma was to be based on the Arthashastra, that is, on principles of politics. This really meant that politics and religion were, in essence, kept apart, with religion being essentially a personal duty of the king. Thus, the kings were not dominated by the priests or by the sacred law expounded by them. Religion, however, was important for legitimizing and strengthening the position of the rulers. Many of the rulers, therefore, built grand temples, often at their capitals, and gave handsome land-grants for the maintenance of the temples and to the Brahmans.


- South India: The Chola Empire (900-1200)
    Powerful kingdoms had risen in South India during the sixth and eighth centuries. The most important among them were the Pallavas and the Pandyas, who dominated modern Tamil Nadu, the Cheras of modern Kerala, and the Chalukyas, who dominated the Maharashtra area or the Deccan. It was the Chalukyan king, Pulakeshin II, who had defeated Harsha and prevented him from expanding his kingdom towards the Deccan. Some of these kingdoms, such as the Pallavas and Pandyas, had strong navies. They also played an important role in strengthening economic, religious, and cultural relations with the countries of Southeast Asia, and with China. Their navies enabled them to invade and rule parts of Sri Lanka for some time.

    The Chola Empire, which arose in the ninth century, brought under its control a large part of the peninsula. The Cholas developed a powerful navy, which enabled them to conquer Sri Lanka and the Maldives. Its impact was felt even by the countries of Southeast Asia. The Chola Empire can be said to mark a climax in South Indian history.

    THE RISE OF THE CHOLA EMPIRE
        The founder of the Chola Empire was Vijayalaya, who was initially a feudatory of the Pallavas. He captured Tanjore in around 850 AD. By the end of the ninth century, the Cholas had defeated both the Pallavas of Kanchi (Tondaimandalam) and weakened the Pandyas, bringing the southern Tamil country under their control. However, the Cholas struggled to defend their position against the Rashtrakutas. As noted in a previous chapter, Krishna III defeated the Chola king and annexed the northern part of the Chola Empire. This was a serious setback for the Cholas, but they rapidly recovered, particularly after the death of Krishna III in 965 and the downfall of the Rashtrakuta Empire.

    AGE OF RAJARAJA AND RAJENDRA I
        The greatest Chola rulers were Rajaraja (985-1014) and his son Rajendra I (1014-1044). Rajaraja destroyed the Chera navy at Trivandrum and attacked Quilon. He then conquered Madurai and captured the Pandyan king. He also invaded Sri Lanka and annexed its northern part to his empire. These moves were partly motivated by his desire to control trade with Southeast Asian countries. The Coromandel coast and Malabar were centers for India’s trade with Southeast Asia. One of his naval exploits was the conquest of the Maldives. Rajaraja also annexed the northwestern parts of the Ganga kingdom in Karnataka and overran Vengi.

        Rajendra had been appointed heir apparent during his father’s lifetime and had considerable experience in administration and warfare before his accession to the throne. He carried forward the annexationist policy of Rajaraja by completely overrunning the Pandya and Chera countries and including them in his empire. The conquest of Sri Lanka was also completed, with the crown and royal insignia of the king and queen of Sri Lanka being captured in a battle. Sri Lanka was not able to free itself from Chola control for another 50 years.

        Rajaraja and Rajendra I marked their victories by erecting a number of Siva and Vishnu temples at various places. The most famous of these was the Brihadishwara temple at Tanjore, which was completed in 1010. The Chola rulers adopted the practice of having inscriptions written on the walls of these temples, giving a historical narrative of their victories. That is why we know so much more about the Cholas than their predecessors.

        One of the most remarkable exploits in the reign of Rajendra I was the march across Kalinga to Bengal, in which the Chola armies crossed the river Ganga and defeated two local kings. This expedition, led by a Chola general, took place in 1022 and followed, in reverse, the same route that the great conqueror Samudragupta had followed. To commemorate this occasion, Rajendra I assumed the title of Gangaikondachola (‘the Chola who conquered the Ganga’). He built a new capital near the mouth of the Kaveri River and called it Gangaikondacholapuram (‘the city of the Chola who conquered the Ganga’).

        An even more remarkable exploit during Rajendra I’s reign were the naval expeditions against the revived Srivijaya Empire. The Srivijaya Empire, which had been revived in the 10th century, extended over the Malay Peninsula, Sumatra, Java, and the neighboring islands, and controlled the overseas trade route to China. The rulers of the Sailendra dynasty of the Srivijaya kingdom were Buddhists and had cordial relations with the Cholas. The Sailendra ruler had built a Buddhist monastery at Nagapattinam and, at his instance, Rajendra I had endowed a village for its upkeep. The cause of the breach between the two was the Chola eagerness to remove obstacles to Indian traders and to expand trade with China. The expeditions led to the conquest of Kadaram (Kedah) and several other places in the Malay Peninsula and Sumatra. The Chola navy was the strongest in the area, and for some time the Bay of Bengal was referred to as a ‘Chola lake.’

        The Chola rulers also sent several embassies to China, which were partly diplomatic and partly commercial. Chola embassies reached China in 1016 and 1033. A Chola embassy of 70 merchants reached China in 1077 and, according to a Chinese account, received ‘81,800 strings of copper-cash,’ that is, more than four lakhs of rupees in return for articles of tribute such as glassware, camphor, brocades, rhinoceros horns, and ivory. ‘Tribute’ was the term used by the Chinese for all articles brought for trade.

        The Chola rulers constantly fought with the Chalukyas, who had succeeded the Rashtrakutas. These are called the later Chalukyas, and their capital was at Kalyani. The Cholas and the later Chalukyas clashed for the overlordship of Vengi (Rayalaseema), the Tungabhadra doab, and the Ganga-ruled country in northwest Karnataka. Neither side was able to gain a decisive victory, and the conflict ultimately exhausted both kingdoms. It also appears that the wars became more brutal during this time. The Chola rulers sacked and plundered Chalukyan cities, including Kalyani, massacring the people, including Brahmins and children. They adopted a similar policy in the Pandya country, settling military colonies to overawe the population. They destroyed Anuradhapura, the ancient capital of the rulers of Sri Lanka, and treated their king and queen harshly. These are considered blots in the history of the Chola Empire. However, once they had conquered a country, the Cholas tried to establish a sound system of administration there. One of the remarkable features of the Chola administration was their encouragement of local self-government in the villages across their empire.

        The Chola Empire continued to flourish during the twelfth century, but it declined during the early part of the thirteenth century. The later Chalukyan Empire in the Maharashtra area also came to an end during the twelfth century. The place of the Cholas was taken by the Pandyas and the Hoysalas in the south, and the later Chalukyas were replaced by the Yadavas and the Kakatiyas. All these states extended patronage to arts and architecture. Unfortunately, they weakened themselves by continuously fighting against each other, sacking towns, and even destroying temples. Ultimately, they were destroyed by the sultans of Delhi at the beginning of the fourteenth century.

    CHOLA GOVERNMENT — LOCAL SELF GOVERNMENT
        The king was the most important person in the Chola administration. All authority rested in his hands, but he had a council of ministers to advise him. The kings often went on tours to oversee the administration. The Cholas maintained a large army consisting of elephants, cavalry, and infantry, which were called the three limbs of the army. The infantry was generally armed with spears. Most of the kings had bodyguards who were sworn to defend the king, even at the cost of their lives. The Venetian traveler, Marco Polo, who visited Kerala in the thirteenth century, says that all the soldiers who were bodyguards burned themselves in the funeral pyre of the monarch when he died—a statement which may well be an exaggeration. The Cholas also had a strong navy, which dominated the Malabar and Coromandel coasts and, for some time, the entire Bay of Bengal.

        The Chola state included areas of central control and loosely administered areas under different types of local control. The state was interspersed with hill people and tribals. The basic unit of administration was the nadu, which consisted of a number of villages having close kinship ties and other close associations. The number of nadus increased as fresh lands were brought under cultivation by means of irrigation works such as ponds, wells, etc., and by converting hill or tribal people into agriculturists. Grants to Brahmans and temples increased, both of which helped in expanding cultivation.

        In the Chola kingdom, nadus were grouped into valanadus. The Chola state was divided into four mandalams or provinces. Sometimes, princes of the royal family were appointed governors of provinces. Officials were generally paid by giving them assignments of revenue-bearing lands.

        The Chola rulers built a network of royal roads, which were useful for trade as well as for the movement of the army. Trade and commerce flourished in the Chola empire, and there were some gigantic trade guilds that traded with Java and Sumatra.

        The Cholas also paid attention to irrigation. The river Kaveri and other rivers were used for the purpose. Many tanks for irrigation were built. Some of the Chola rulers carried out an elaborate survey of land in order to fix the government’s share of the land revenue. We do not know what precisely the government’s share was.

        In addition to land tax, the Chola rulers drew their income from tolls on trade, taxes on professions, and also from the plunder of neighboring territories. The Chola rulers were wealthy and could afford to build a number of towns and magnificent monuments, including temples.

        We have already referred to local self-government in the villages in some areas of the Rashtrakuta empire. We know more about village government in the Chola empire from a number of inscriptions. We hear of two assemblies, called the ur and the sabha or mahasabha. The ur was a general assembly of the village. However, we know more about the working of the mahasabha. This was a gathering of adult men in the Brahman villages called agraharams. These were villages with Brahman settlements in which most of the land was rent-free. These villages enjoyed a large measure of autonomy. The affairs of the village were managed by an executive committee to which educated persons owning property were elected, either by drawing lots or by rotation. These members had to retire every three years. There were other committees for helping in the assessment and collection of land revenue, for the maintenance of law and order, justice, etc. One of the important committees was the tank committee, which looked after the distribution of water to the fields. The mahasabha could distribute new lands and exercise ownership rights over them. It could also raise loans for the village and levy taxes.

        The self-government enjoyed by these Chola villages was a very fine system. To some extent, this system worked in the other villages as well. However, the growth of feudalism, which is discussed in an earlier chapter, restricted their autonomy.

    CULTURAL LIFE
        The Chola period saw the further growth and climax of the bhakti movement, which we have discussed separately. The movement was closely linked to temples. The extent and resources of the Chola empire enabled the rulers to build great capitals, such as Tanjore, Gangaikondacholapuram, Kanchi, etc. The rulers maintained large households and large palaces with banquet halls, spacious gardens, and terraces. Thus, we learn of seven- or five-storeyed houses for their chiefs. Unfortunately, none of the palaces of the period have survived. The Chola capital, Gangaikondacholapuram, is now just a small village near Tanjore. However, descriptions of the magnificent palaces of the rulers and their ministers, and of equally magnificent houses in which the wealthy merchants lived, are to be found in the literature of the period.

        Temple architecture in the south attained its climax under the Cholas. The style of architecture that came into vogue during this period is called Dravida because it was confined largely to south India. The main feature of this style was the building of many storeys above the garbhagrika (the innermost chamber where the chief deity resides). The number of storeys varied from five to seven, and they had a typical style which came to be called the vimana. A pillared hall, called a mandapa, with elaborately carved pillars and a flat roof, was generally placed in front of the sanctum. It acted as an audience hall and was a place for various other activities, such as ceremonial dances, which were performed by the devadasis—the women dedicated to the service of the gods. Sometimes, a passage ran around the sanctum so that the devotees could go around it. Images of many other gods could be placed in this passage. This entire structure was enclosed in a courtyard surrounded by high walls, which were pierced by lofty gates called gopurams. In course of time, the vimanas rose higher and higher, the number of courtyards increased to two or three, and the gopurams also became more and more elaborate. Thus, the temple became a miniature city or a palace, with living rooms for priests and many others being provided in it. The temples generally enjoyed revenue-free grants of lands for their expenses. They also received grants and rich donations from the wealthy merchants. Some of the temples became so rich that they entered business, lent money, and took part in business enterprises. They also spent money on improving cultivation, digging tanks, wells, etc., and providing irrigation channels.

        An early example of the Dravida style of temple architecture is the eighth-century temple of Kailasanatha at Kanchipuram. One of the finest and most elaborate examples of the style is, however, provided by the Brihadiswara temple at Tanjore, built by Rajaraja I. This is also called the Rajaraja temple because the Cholas were in the habit of installing images of kings and queens in the courtyards of the temples. The temple at Gangaikondacholapuram, though in a dilapidated condition, is another fine example of temple architecture under the Cholas. A large number of temples were also built at other places in south India. However, it may be well to remember that the proceeds for some of these activities were obtained from the plunder of the population of the neighboring areas by the Chola rulers.

        After the fall of the Cholas, temple building activity continued under the Chalukyas of Kalyani and the Hoysalas. The district of Dharwar and the Hoysala capital, Halebid, had a large number of temples. The most magnificent of these is the Hoysalesvara temple. It is the best example of what is called the Chalukyan style. Apart from the images of gods and their attendants, both men and women (yaksha and yakshini), the temples contain finely sculptured panels that show a busy panorama of life, including dance, music, and scenes of war and love. Thus, life was closely integrated with religion. For the common man, the temples were not merely a place for worship but the hub of social and cultural life as well.

        The art of sculpture attained a high standard in south India during this period. One example of this was the giant statue of Gomateswara at Shravanabelagola. Another aspect was image-making, which reached its zenith in the dancing figure of Shiva, called Nataraja. The Nataraja figures of this period, particularly those in bronze, are considered masterpieces. Many fine examples of these are to be found in museums in India and abroad.

        The rulers of the various dynasties also patronized arts and letters during this period. While Sanskrit was regarded as the language of high culture and a number of kings, as well as scholars and court poets, wrote in it, a remarkable feature of the period was the growth of literature in the local languages of India. A number of popular saints called Nayanmars and Alvars, who were devotees of Shiva and Vishnu respectively, flourished in the Tamil kingdoms between the sixth and the ninth centuries. They composed their works in Tamil. The writings of the Saivite saints, which were collected into eleven volumes under the name Tirumurai in the early part of the twelfth century, are considered sacred and are looked upon as the fifth Veda. The age of Kamban, who is placed in the second half of the eleventh and the early part of the twelfth century, is regarded as a golden age in Tamil literature. Kamban’s Ramayana is considered a classic in Tamil literature. Kamban is believed to have lived at the court of a Chola king. Many others, too, took their themes from the Ramayana and Mahabharata, thus bringing these classics nearer to the people.

        Though younger than Tamil, Kannada also became a literary language during this period. The Rashtrakuta, Chalukya, and Hoysala rulers patronized Kannada as well as Telugu. The Rashtrakuta king, Amoghavarsha, wrote a book on poetics in Kannada. Many Jain scholars also contributed to the growth of Kannada. Pampa, Ponna, and Ranna are regarded as the three gems of Kannada poetry. Although they were under the influence of Jainism, they also wrote on themes taken from the Ramayana and Mahabharata. Nanniah, who lived at the court of a Chalukyan king, began the Telugu version of the Mahabharata. The work begun by him was completed in the thirteenth century by Tikkanna. Like the Tamil Ramayana, the Telugu Mahabharata is a classic which inspired many subsequent writers. Many folk or popular themes are also to be found in these literatures. Popular themes, which were not derived from Sanskrit and which reflect popular sentiments and emotions, are called desi or rural in Telugu.

        We can, thus, see that the period from the eighth to the twelfth century was not only remarkable for the growth of regional kingdoms and regional integration but was also a period of cultural growth, and the development of trade, commerce, and agriculture in south India. Merchants and artisans increased their strength with the development of foreign trade under the Cholas.


- Economic and Social Life, Education, and Religious Beliefs (800-1200)
    Although we have not yet studied political developments in North India from 1000 to 1200, the entire period from 800 to 1200 may be regarded as one for the purpose of studying economic and social life and religious beliefs. Economic and social life, ideas, and beliefs change much more slowly than political life. That is why many of the earlier features which existed before the ninth century continued during this period as well. At the same time, there were a number of new factors that made the period different from the earlier one. Generally speaking, new elements as well as elements of continuity are found in every historical period, but the extent and direction of change vary.

    Trade and Commerce
        The economic situation, especially trade and commerce in the country during this period, is a matter of debate among historians. Some consider it a period of stagnation and decline, with setbacks in both foreign trade and long-distance trade within the country, a decline of towns, and greater localism and regionalism. The virtual absence of gold coins until the tenth century is considered proof of this. We cannot examine all these points in detail here, but suffice it to say that the fall of the Roman Empire did not seriously affect India’s trade with the West since two large empires, the Byzantine Empire with its base in Constantinople and the Sassanid Empire based in Iran, arose during the subsequent period. Both of them took keen interest in trade with India and the Indian Ocean region. After the rise of the Arab Empire in the seventh century, the Arabs expanded Western trade to India, Southeast Asia, and China.

        There is no reason to believe that Indian traders were excluded from this expanded trade. Hence, gold and silver continued to come to India in return for its favorable trade. That is why India continued to be considered a country full of gold and silver, making it an attractive prize for foreigners to invade and trade with. Why the gold and silver was used for decorating temples and palaces, or for jewelry, or simply buried for future use, and not used for coinage, is a question to which no satisfactory answer is available.

        We have seen how a large number of states arose in the country during this period, and the growing power and authority of those holding superior rights in land. Many of these kingdoms expanded agriculture by building bunds, wells, etc. In some instances, as in Bengal, Sind, and the Tamil country, rulers invited Brahmins to settle down by giving them grants of rent-free lands to strengthen their own positions. Since the bulk of these lands were uncultivated, many tribesmen who were nomads, cattle-rearers, or food-gatherers were induced to settle down to agriculture. Such expansion of cultivation further strengthened the position of local chiefs, semantas, etc.

        We do not know the impact of this development on internal trade. The growth of small towns that catered to local trade, along with greater local self-sufficiency, seems to have gone hand in hand. In North India, in particular, the decline of long-distance trade within the country apparently led to the decline of trade guilds (shrenis) and sanghas. The guilds had often consisted of people belonging to different castes. They had their own rules of conduct, which members were legally bound to obey, and were entitled to lend or borrow money or receive endowments. With the decline of long-distance trade and commerce, these bodies lost their former importance. We find very few references in North India during this period to guilds receiving endowments. In the course of time, some of the older shrenis emerged as sub-castes. For example, the Dvadasa-shreni, which was a guild, became a sub-caste of the Vaishyas. Jainism, which was patronized by the mercantile sections, also received a setback in North India.

        In some of the Dharma Shastras written during this period, a ban was imposed on travel beyond areas where the munja grass does not grow or where the black gazelle does not roam, i.e., outside India proper. Travel across the salt seas was also considered polluting. These bans were not taken seriously, as we have accounts of Indian merchants, philosophers, medical men, and craftsmen visiting Baghdad and other Muslim towns in West Asia during this period. Perhaps the ban was meant for Brahmins only, or to discourage too many Indians from going to areas dominated by Islam in the West and Buddhism in the East, fearing they might bring back heretical religious ideas.

        The ban on sea travel did not interfere with the growth of India’s overseas trade with Southeast Asia and China. Trade between South India and Southeast Asia had started from the sixth century onwards. The growing geographical knowledge about these countries is reflected in the literature of the time. The peculiar features of the languages, dresses, etc., are mentioned in the books of the period, such as Harisena’s Brihatkatha-kosh. There are many stories about the adventures of Indian merchants in the magical waters of the area, which became the basis of the well-known story of Sindbad the Sailor. Indian merchants were organized in guilds, the most famous of them being the Manigramam and the Nandest, which had been active since early times. These guilds displayed a spirit of enterprise, engaging in retail and wholesale trade in many foreign countries. They also gave handsome grants to temples, which became centers of social and cultural life, and sometimes advanced money for trade. Many Indian traders settled in these countries, some of whom married local women. The priests followed the traders. In this way, both Buddhist and Hindu religious ideas spread to the region. The Buddhist temple of Borobudur in Java and the Hindu temple of Angkor Wat in Cambodia testify to the spread of both religions there. Some ruling families in the region became semi-Hinduized and welcomed trade and cultural relations with India. Indian culture mingled with local culture to establish new literary and cultural forms. Some observers believe that the material prosperity of Southeast Asia, the growth of civilization, and the establishment of large states were largely due to the introduction of Indian techniques of irrigated rice cultivation.

        The chief Indian port for sailing to Java, Sumatra, etc., was Tamralipti (Tamluk) in Bengal. In most of the stories of the period, merchants start for Suvarnadvipa (modern Indonesia) or Kataha (Kedah in Malaya) from Tamralipti. A fourteenth-century writer in Java speaks of people from Jambudvipa (India), Karnataka (South India), and Gaud (Bengal) coming in large numbers on big ships. Traders from Gujarat also took part in this trade.

        Due to its prosperity, China had become a main focus of trade in the Indian Ocean. The Chinese consumed enormous quantities of spices, which were imported from Southeast Asia and India. They also imported ivory, the best of which came from Africa, and glassware from West Asia. Additionally, they imported medicinal herbs, lac, incense, and various rare commodities. Generally, products from Africa and West Asia did not go beyond Malabar in South India. Nor did many Chinese ships venture beyond the Moluccas in Southeast Asia. Thus, both India and Southeast Asia served as important staging centers for trade between China and the countries of West Asia and Africa. Indian traders, especially from the Tamil country and Kalinga (modern Orissa and Bengal), played an active role in this trade, along with Persians, and later, the Arabs. Much of the trade to China was carried in Indian ships, with teakwood from Malabar, Bengal, and Burma providing the basis for a strong tradition of shipbuilding. The weather conditions were such that ships could not sail directly from the Middle East to China. They had to wait in ports for favorable winds, which blew from the west to the east before the monsoon and from east to west after it. Indian and Southeast Asian ports were preferred by merchants for this reason.

        The main seaport for foreign trade in China during this period was Canton, or Kanfu, as the Arab travelers called it. Buddhist scholars traveled from India to China by sea. Chinese chroniclers tell us that the number of Indian monks in the Chinese court at the close of the tenth and the beginning of the eleventh century was the highest in Chinese history. A Chinese account from a slightly earlier period states that the Canton river was full of ships from India, Persia, and Arabia. It mentions that in Canton itself, there were three Hindu temples where Indians resided. The presence of Indians in Chinese seas is also confirmed by Japanese records, which credit two Indians for introducing cotton into Japan.

        Indian rulers, particularly the Pala and Sena rulers of Bengal, and the Pallava and Chola rulers of South India, encouraged this trade by sending a series of embassies to the Chinese emperors. The Chola ruler, Rajendra I, sent a naval expedition against Malaya and the neighboring countries to counter their interference in the trade with China. Rajendra I’s embassy to China traveled in an Indian ship. Evidence suggests that many shipyards were located along the west coast, including in Gujarat. Thus, the growth of India’s foreign trade in the region was based on a strong maritime tradition, including shipbuilding, and the skill and enterprise of its traders.

        The Chinese trade was very favorable to the countries engaged in it, so much so that in the thirteenth century, the Chinese government tried to restrict the export of gold and silver from China. Indian ships gradually gave way to the larger and faster Chinese and Arab ships. Chinese ships were several stories high and could carry 600 passengers in addition to 400 soldiers. An important factor in the growth of Chinese ships was the use of the mariner’s compass, an invention that later traveled from China to the West. By this time, Indian science and technology were being left behind.

        Thus, India’s trade with Western areas and with Southeast Asia and China grew steadily. South India, Bengal, and Gujarat took the lead in this trade, contributing significantly to the wealth and prosperity of these areas.

    Condition of the People
        There was no decline in the high standard of Indian handicrafts such as textiles, gold and silver work, metallurgy, etc., during this period. Indian agriculture also continued to thrive.

        Many Arab travelers testify to the fertility of the soil and the skill of the Indian peasant.

        All the literary works of the period tell us that ministers, officials, and feudal chiefs lived in great ostentation and splendour. They copied the ways of kings, living in fine houses that were sometimes three to five stories high. They wore costly foreign apparel such as imported woolen clothes, Chinese silk, and costly jewels and ornaments made of gold and silver. They maintained large households with many women and a train of domestic servants. Whenever they went out, they were accompanied by many attendants. They assumed high-sounding titles, such as mahasamantadhipati, and had distinctive symbols, such as banners, decorated umbrellas, and yak-tails to whisk away flies.

        Big merchants also emulated the kings, and their lifestyles were sometimes quite royal. Of a millionaire (Xozésvare) in the Chalukyan empire, it is said that huge banners with ringing bells were hoisted over his house, and that he owned many horses and elephants. The main building was approached by a crystal staircase, and the temple had crystal floors and walls adorned with religious paintings containing a crystal image. Vaseupala and Tejahpala, who were ministers in Gujarat, are reputed to have been the richest merchants of their time.

        We cannot, however, assume from the above that there was prosperity all around. While foodstuffs were cheap, many poor people in the cities could not get enough to eat. The author of the Rajatarangini (written in Kashmir in the twelfth century) has them in mind when he says that, whereas the courtiers ate fried meat and drank cooled wine perfumed with flowers, the ordinary people had to be content with rice and stpala-saka (a wild vegetable of bitter taste). There are many stories about the hard lot of poor men and women, some of whom resorted to a life of robbery and plunder. As for the villages, where the large bulk of the population lived, we have to gather information about the life of the peasants from literary works, grants of land, inscriptions, etc. The commentators on Dharmashastras tell us that the rate of the revenue demand from the peasants was one-sixth of the produce, as before. However, from some of the grants, we learn of a large number of additional cesses, such as grazing tax, tax on ponds, etc. The peasants had to pay these taxes over and above the land-revenue. In addition, some of the grants gave the grantees the right to levy fixed or unfixed, proper or improper taxes on the peasants. The peasants also had to render forced labor (vishai). In some cases, as in central India and Orissa, we find some villages being given to Brahmins and other donees along with artisans, herdsmen, and cultivators who were tied to the soil like serfs in medieval Europe. In literary works, we hear of chiefs realizing money on every opportunity that offered itself. We are told of a Rajput chief who made money even from sparrows, dead birds, pig dung, and the shrouds of dead bodies. Another writer tells us of a village that was depopulated due to the actions of a chief (samania).

        To this may be added the frequent recurrence of famines and wars. In the wars, the destruction of water reservoirs, burning of villages, seizure by force of all the cattle or the grains stored in granaries, and destruction of cities were normal features, so much so that they were considered legitimate by the writers of the period.

        Thus, the growth of a society that may be called feudal increased the burdens on the common man.

    NATURE OF SOCIETY
        A number of important changes took place in Indian society during this period. One of these was the growing power of a class of people who were variously called semanta, randk, rdutia (Rajput), etc., by contemporary writers. Their origins were very different. Some were government officers who were increasingly paid not in cash but by assigning to them revenue-bearing villages. Others were defeated rajas and their supporters who continued to enjoy the revenue of limited areas. Still others were local hereditary chiefs or military adventurers who had carved out a sphere of authority with the help of armed supporters. Some were tribal or clan leaders. Thus, there was a hierarchy among them, but their actual position varied depending on the situation. Some of them were only village chiefs, some dominated a tract comprising a number of villages, while a few dominated an entire region. They constantly contended against each other and tried to enhance their sphere of authority and privileges.

        The revenue assignments (called jagir or fief) granted by a ruler to his officers and supporters were temporary in theory and were liable to be resumed whenever the ruler wanted. However, in practice, this was rarely done, except in the case of outright rebellion or disloyalty. According to current notions, it was a sin to deprive even a defeated ruler of his lands.

        As a result, the kingdoms of this period included large areas dominated by defeated and subordinate rulers who were constantly on the lookout for reasserting their independence. Within the territories of these rulers, various officers looked upon their assignments as hereditary fiefs. In the course of time, even various government offices began to be considered hereditary. We have seen earlier in a case from Bengal, where members of a family held the office of makamani for four generations. Similarly, most offices began to be considered the monopoly of a few families. The hereditary chiefs gradually assumed many of the functions of the government. They not only assessed and collected land revenue, but also assumed more and more administrative powers, such as the right to award punishments and exact fines on their own, powers that were previously considered royal privileges. They assumed the right to sublet their land to their followers without the prior permission of the ruler, thus increasing the number of people who drew sustenance from land without working on it themselves.

        Some historians call this type of society ‘feudal’, although features of European feudalism, such as vassalage, serfdom, and manors, did not exist in India. It is emphasized that the common feature between the two was that the society was dominated by a class of people who derived their income from the surplus produced by the peasants but did not work on the land themselves. Also, the position of the primary producers, the peasants, was a dependent one. A number of other historians prefer to call this society a ‘medieval society’. They consider feudalism to be the specific feature of ‘medieval’ European society, as we have mentioned earlier.

        Without delving further into this controversy, we may note that a new type of society grew in India from the eighth century onwards, emphasizing localism and sub-regionalism. This is important for understanding the political and cultural developments during this and the subsequent period.

    THE CASTE SYSTEM
        (a) Brahmans and Rajputs
            The caste system, which had been established much earlier, continued to be the basis of society. But there were important changes within the caste system. There was considerable strengthening of the position of the Brahmans. As we have seen, the ruler of Sind, who was himself a Brahman, and the rulers of Bengal and South India, invited Brahmans and gave large-scale revenue-free lands to them to settle down. These Brahmans not only expanded cultivation but also acted as local revenue officials, ministers, accountants, etc. Some of them also played an active role in military affairs. Education and the production of literary works were other important fields of their activities. The writers of the period appear to reflect the growing importance of the Brahmans by further exalting their position. Some argue that the ancient caste of Kshatriyas had disappeared, and the Vaishyas had sunk to the position of Shudras, leaving the Brahmans as the only dvija (twice-born or privileged) section in society. However, this view in the shastras did not necessarily reflect social reality. We have already referred to the existence of rich merchants, Hindu and Jain, and the rise of a powerful class of landed chiefs. In this context, we have the rise of a new section called the Rajputs. During this period, a large number of states were being ruled by Rajputs. These Rajputs were considered leaders of clans that dominated certain tracts of land and provided the core of the armed forces. The leaders of the clan, most of whom were related to the ruler by ties of blood, considered the state to be ruled jointly by them.

            There is a good deal of controversy among scholars about the origin of the Rajputs. Some consider them to be of mixed origin, some being descendants of foreigners such as Shakas, Hunas, etc., and indigenous tribes, even Brahmans. On the other hand, many Rajput clans, traditionally numbering thirty-six, trace their genealogy to the solar and lunar families of the Kshatriyas mentioned in the Mahabharata. Modern scholarship emphasizes the process by which people belonging to different social groups tried to legitimize their newly acquired power and position by being accorded the status of Kshatriyas. Sometimes a mixed Brahman-Kshatriya status was sought by claiming descent through a Brahman mother. Scholars consider this to be part of a complex process of social growth. Thus, in some areas of Rajasthan, tribal lands were colonized, and Brahmans, traders, and warriors settled on the land. In many areas, this was accompanied by introducing a superior type of economy based on irrigation through wells, bunds, etc., and the cultivation of superior crops. In the process, some of the cultivators became Rajputs, while others remained Shudras.

            What is called ‘Rajputization’ is accompanied by the growth of the agrarian economy, and also the acquisition of political power by some sections. The Brahmans played an important role in this process. Thus, there was the agniput legend, traced to the eleventh century, whereby the sage Vashishtha produced four Rajput clans—the Pratiharas, Solankis or Chalukyas, Parmars or Pawars, and Chauhans or Chahamans—from the sacrificial fire. During this period, Brahmans wrote many genealogies of ruling families, linking them to ancient Kshatriya families. Thus, the Gurjar-Pratiharas, reputed to originate from the Gurjar stock, were linked to Lakshman, who had acted as the door-keeper (pratihar) of Rama.

            This Brahman-Rajput alliance had many political and cultural consequences. The Rajputs, acting as champions of the newly expansionist Hinduism, symbolized their power by building grand temples and endowed them, along with Brahman priests, with large grants of lands, gifts, and endowments.

            Thus, caste (jaati) is not as rigid as has sometimes been believed: individuals and groups could rise in the varna scale, and they could also fall. Sometimes, it was difficult to classify new castes in the varna scale. An instance of this is the Kayastha caste, which begins to be mentioned more prominently from this period. It seems that originally, people from different castes, including Brahmans and Shudras, who worked in royal establishments, were called Kayasthas. In time, they emerged as a distinct caste. Hinduism was expanding rapidly during this period. It not only absorbed large numbers of Buddhists and Jains but also many indigenous tribes. Foreigners such as the Hunas were also Hinduized. These new sections formed new castes and sub-castes, with the tribals often continuing their own customs, marriage rituals, and even their tribal gods and goddesses, who were often made subordinate to Hindu gods. Thus, society and religion became more and more complex.

        (b) Shudras, Dalits, and Slaves
            According to the law-giver Yajnavalkya, it was possible for a Brahman to have food with his farmer, barber, milkman, and family friends. According to modern historian D.C. Sircar, an important feature of the caste system during this period was ‘the gradual elevation of the social position of the Shudras’. Although they were not allowed to study the Vedas, they became eligible for smarta rituals, such as those for birth, death, name-giving, etc. As agriculture expanded, many of the tribals were included in this category. The Jats, who were a pastoral nomadic tribe in Sind, gradually moved to the Punjab and became agriculturists and warriors. Although in the varna system they were classified as Shudras, they formed a higher section and considered themselves on par with the Rajputs.

            Marriages between the higher castes and the Shudras were frowned upon, but that they existed is shown by dubbing the marriage of a high-caste man with a lower-caste woman as anuloma (according to norms), and the marriage of a low-caste man with a high-caste woman as pratiloma (against norms). The origin of new castes, often consisting of professional groups such as potters, weavers, barbers, etc., or tribals, was explained as the result of such mixed marriages.

            As compared to the Shudras, the position of the Dalits seems to have deteriorated. The Dalits included those following professions such as scavenging, skinning dead animals, shoemaking, hunting, etc. These people were called antyaja or untouchables, and formed the fifth social grade, outside the four-fold varna system. They were often required to live away from areas inhabited by upper castes. There is even a discussion in the shastras on whether the shadow of an antyaja was polluting. In some parts of the country, the Chandals were required to hit a wooden board on a stick as they walked, so that upper-caste people would not come into contact with them. In most areas, these sections were not allowed to own cultivated land.

            Slavery also existed during the period. Prisoners of war and debtors unable to pay their debts could be sold into slavery. During famines, many farmers sold themselves or their wives and children for food. Women were also purchased for domestic work or company. However, there were no systematic slave raids as in the case of the Turks. In general, slaves were treated better than people from the antyaja or despised castes.

            Though slaves were not used for fighting, they could fight. We are told that if a slave saved his master’s life, he became free and was entitled to a share of his master’s property. A female slave bearing a child to her master also became free. In general, emancipation of a slave was considered a good deed, and there were rules prescribed for doing so.

    CONDITION OF WOMEN
        As in earlier periods, women were generally considered to be mentally inferior. Their duty was to obey their husbands blindly. A writer illustrates the wife’s duty of personal service towards her husband by stating that she should shampoo his feet and render him other services befitting a servant. However, the writer adds that the husband should follow the righteous path and be free from hatred and jealousy towards his wife. Women continued to be denied the right to study the Vedas. Additionally, the marriageable age for girls was lowered, which hindered their opportunities for higher education. The omission of references to women teachers in dictionaries written during the period reflects the poor state of higher education for women.

        However, from some dramatic works of the period, we find that court ladies and even the queen’s maids-in-waiting were capable of composing excellent Sanskrit and Prakrit verses. Various stories highlight the skill of princesses in the fine arts, especially in painting and music. Daughters of high officials, courtesans, and concubines were also known to be highly skilled in various arts, including poetry.

        As for marriage, the Smriti writers say that girls were to be given away by their parents between the ages of six and eight or between their eighth year and attaining puberty. Remarriage was allowed under certain conditions if the husband had deserted (i.e., was not heard of), died, adopted the life of a recluse, became impotent, or had become an outcaste.

        In general, women were distrusted. They were kept in seclusion, and their lives were regulated by male relatives—father, brother, husband, or son. However, within the home, they were honored. If a husband abandoned a wife, even if she was guilty of offensive behavior, she was entitled to maintenance. With the growth of property rights in land, women’s property rights also increased.

        To preserve family property, women were given the right to inherit the property of their male relatives. With some reservations, a widow was entitled to the entire estate of her husband if he died without a son. Daughters also had the right to inherit the properties of a widow. Thus, the growth of feudal society strengthened the concept of private property.

        The practice of Sati was made obligatory by some writers but condemned by others. According to an Arab writer, Sulaiman, the wives of kings sometimes burnt themselves on the funeral pyre of their husbands, but it was for them to exercise their option in the matter. It appears that with the practice of a large number of women being maintained by the leading chiefs, and with resultant disputes about property, the practice of Sati spread.

        Upper-class women lived in seclusion and were generally kept away from public view. However, there was no system of purdah or veiling of women. Abu Zaid, a tenth-century Arab traveler, noted that most Indian princes, while holding court, allowed their women to be seen unveiled by all men present, including foreigners. In Orissa and Kashmir, many women ruled as queens in their own right. Among them were Prabhavati Gupta of the Vakataka dynasty, who ruled for at least thirteen years as the mother of the Yewaraja, and Queen Didda, who ruled Kashmir for fifty years and withstood all intrigues against her.

        We have little information on the lives of ordinary women. They must have worked hard, side by side with their men, in addition to managing the household and tending children.

    DRESS, FOOD, AND AMUSEMENTS
        There were no significant changes in the style of dress for men and women during this period. The dhoti and sari remained the normal attire for men and women in most parts of the country. In North India, men wore jackets, and women wore bodices (cholis). Sculptures suggest that long coats, trousers, and shoes were worn by upper-class men in North India. According to Rajatarangini, Harsha introduced a general dress befitting a king in Kashmir, which included a long coat. It is said that a former chief minister, who wore a short coat, incurred the king’s displeasure. Woolen blankets were used in winter, while cotton was the material most commonly used. The upper classes also used silk cloth and fine muslin.

        Arab travelers testify to the fondness of both men and women for wearing ornaments. Both men and women wore gold bracelets and earrings, sometimes set with costly stones. A Chinese writer, Chau Ju Kua, says that in Gujarat, both men and women wore double earrings, close-fitting clothes, hoods on their heads, and red-colored shoes on their feet. Another famous traveler, Marco Polo, tells us that in Malabar, men and women wore only a loincloth, the king being no exception. He also notes that the profession of tailoring was unknown. Loincloths were also worn by men and women in Quilon. Despite their scanty clothing, the kings of southern India were fond of jewelry. According to Chau Ju Kua, the king of Malabar wore a cotton loincloth and was barefoot like his subjects, but when going out in a procession on an elephant, he wore a golden hat ornamented with pearls and gems, as well as golden armlets and anklets. Marco Polo says, “What this king wears in gold, gems, and pearls is worth more than a city’s ransom.”

        As far as food is concerned, vegetarianism appeared to have been the rule in many areas and among many sections of the population. However, the leading Smriti writer of the times describes at great length the occasions when the eating of meat was lawful. From this, it appears that peacock, horse, wild ass, wild cock, and wild pig were considered lawful food.

        Arab writers compliment the Indians for the absence of intoxicants among them. However, this appears to be an idealized picture. Literary works of the period contain many references to wine-drinking. Wine was consumed on ceremonial occasions, including marriages and feasts, and was also a popular outing among some classes of citizens. Even women in the king’s train indulged freely in wine. While some Smriti writers forbade wine-drinking for the three upper castes, others allowed it for the Kshatriyas and Vaishyas, with some exceptions.

        The literature of the time shows that the people of the towns were fun-loving. Apart from fairs and festivals, excursions to gardens and swimming parties were widely popular. Fights among various types of animals, such as rams and cocks, as well as wrestling bouts, were popular among the masses. The upper classes continued to enjoy activities like dicing, hunting, and a form of Indian polo, which was regarded as a royal pastime.

    EDUCATION, SCIENCE, AND RELIGIOUS LEARNING
        The system of education that had gradually developed in earlier periods continued during this period with little change. There was no concept of mass education at that time. People learned what they felt was necessary for their livelihood. Reading and writing were confined to a small section, mostly Brahmans and some upper-class groups, especially Kayasthas.

        Sometimes, temples made arrangements for higher education as well. Generally, students had to go to the house of a teacher or live with them to receive higher education. In such cases, students had to pay fees to their teacher or give them a gift at the end of their education. Students who were too poor to pay fees were expected to do personal service for the teacher. The main subjects studied were the various branches of the Vedas and grammar. Logic and philosophy were also studied. The study of politics, including political morality, was popular among the nobility. A notable contribution to this branch of study was Kamandaka’s Nitisara.

        The Kayasthas had their own system of teaching administration, including accountancy. Science, including mathematics, astronomy, and medicine, was also taught at many centers. The Arab astronomer, Abu Maashir of Balkh, studied at Banaras for ten years during the ninth century.

        The responsibility for educating a craft or profession was generally left to the guilds or individual families. For example, there is a detailed description of how a merchant carefully trained his son for the profession.

        More formal education, with greater emphasis on secular subjects, continued at some of the Buddhist vihāras (monasteries), with Nalanda in Bihar being the most famous. Other centers of learning included Vikramsila and Uddandapur, also in Bihar. These centers attracted students from distant places, including Tibet. Education for most of the residents was free, and the rulers made lavish grants of money and land to support these centers. For example, Nalanda had a grant of 200 villages.

        Kashmir was another important center of education. Many Saiva sects and centers of learning flourished during this period. Important mathas were set up in South India, such as in Madurai and Srirangam. These educational centers played a significant role in fostering discussion on religion and philosophy. They enabled ideas to flow freely across the country, strengthening India’s cultural unity.

        The growth of science in India slowed down during this period, and the country was no longer regarded as a leading center of scientific thought. Surgery declined because the dissection of dead bodies was considered only fit for people of low castes, and surgery became the profession of barbers. Astronomy was gradually overshadowed by astrology. However, some progress was made in mathematics. The Lilawari of Bhaskar II, written during this period, remained a standard text for a long time. Some advances were also made in medicine through the use of minerals, especially mercury. Many books were written on plant sciences and for the treatment of animals, such as horses and elephants. However, no method was found for breeding fine-quality horses, and India remained dependent on imports from Central Asia, including Arabia and Iran. With the conquest of these regions by Muslim rulers, the Indian rulers faced difficulties in securing a supply of good horses.

        The stagnation of Indian science during this period can be attributed to several factors. The growth of science is closely connected with the development of society as a whole. During this period, society became increasingly rigid and narrow, with setbacks in urban life and communication, accompanied by growing religious orthodoxy.

        Another reason was the tendency of Indians to isolate themselves from the main currents of scientific thought outside India. This is reflected in the writings of al-Biruni, a noted scientist and scholar from Central Asia who lived in India for about ten years during the early part of the eleventh century. Although al-Biruni admired Indian science and learning, he noted the insular attitude of the learned people of India, particularly the Brahmans. He said: “They are haughty, foolish, vain, self-conceited, and stolid. They are by nature niggardly in communicating that which they know, and they take the greatest possible care to withhold it from men of another caste among their own people, still more from any foreigners. According to their belief, no other created beings besides them have any knowledge of science whatsoever.”

    Revival Movements and Beliefs
        The period is marked by a revival and expansion of Hinduism, accompanied by a continued decline of Buddhism and Jainism. Not only were the tenets of Buddhism and Jainism challenged at the intellectual level, but on some occasions, Buddhist and Jain monks were persecuted. According to tradition, the Pandya king at Madurai executed large numbers of Jain monks at the instance of a Saivite preacher, Sambandar. In some instances, their temples were also taken over. Thus, the temple of Puri was once a Buddhist temple, and the temple near the Qutub Minar had once been a Jain temple before being converted into a Vishnu temple. While it is unclear how widespread such instances were, even if they were few and far between, they can hardly be defended. However, these actions were not part of a misguided religious philosophy of temple-destruction, as seen with the early Arab and Turkish invaders later on.

        During this period, Buddhism gradually became confined to eastern India. The Pala rulers were patrons of Buddhism, but the decline of Pala power after the tenth century dealt a blow to Buddhism in the region. However, even more serious were the internal developments within Buddhism. Buddha had preached a practical philosophy, with a minimum of priesthood and speculation about God. Over time, this worship became more elaborate, with a belief that a worshiper could attain their desires by uttering magical words (mantras) and performing various mystic gestures. It was believed that these practices, along with various austerities and secret rites, could lead to supernatural powers, such as the ability to fly, become invisible, or see things at a distance. Humanity has long yearned for control over nature in such ways, and many of these desires have been fulfilled through modern science. Many Hindu yogis also adopted these practices, with Gorakhnath being the most famous among them. The followers of Gorakhnath were called Nath-Panthis, and at one time, they were popular all over northern India. Many of these yogis belonged to lower castes and denounced the caste system and the privileges claimed by Brahmins. The path they preached was called tantra, which was open to all, irrespective of caste distinctions.

        Thus, Buddhism did not so much decline as it assumed forms that made it indistinguishable from Hinduism.

        Jainism continued to be popular, particularly among trading communities. The Chalukyan rulers of Gujarat patronized Jainism. During this time, some of the most magnificent Jain temples, such as the Dilwara temple at Mt. Abu, were built. The Paramara rulers of Malwa also built many large images of Jain saints and of Mahavira, who began to be worshipped as a god. The magnificent Jainalayas (temples) built in various parts also acted as resting places for travelers. In southern India, Jainism reached its peak during the ninth and tenth centuries. The Ganga rulers of Karnataka were great patrons of Jainism. During this period, many Jain basadis (temples) and sahasramedhas (pillars) were set up in different regions. The colossal image at Shravanabelagola was set up during this time. The statue, about 18 meters high and carved out of granite rock, shows the saint standing and practicing rigid austerities, unmindful of the snakes coiled around his feet and the anthills that had grown up around him. The Jain doctrine of the four gifts—learning, food, medicine, and shelter—helped make Jainism popular among the people. Over time, the growing rigidity of Jainism and the loss of royal patronage led to its decline.

        The revival and expansion of Hinduism took many forms. Shiva and Vishnu became the chief gods, and magnificent temples were built to proclaim their supremacy. In the process, many local gods and goddesses, including those of tribals who had been Hinduized, became subordinate or their consorts. In eastern India, the consorts—Tara, the consort of Buddha, and Durga and Kali, the consorts of Shiva—became themselves the chief objects of worship. Nevertheless, the rise of the worship of Shiva and Vishnu signified the growth of cultural synthesis. Thus, in an era of disintegration, religion played a positive part. However, the religious revival also increased the power and arrogance of the Brahmins, leading to a series of popular movements that targeted the Brahmins and emphasized human equality and freedom.

        We have already referred to the growth of tantrism in North India, where anyone, irrespective of caste, could be enrolled. But far more important and broad-based was the growth of the bhakti movement in South India. The bhakti movement was led by a series of popular saints called Nayanmars and Alvars. These saints rejected austerities and viewed religion not as a matter of cold, formal worship but as a living bond based on love between the god and the worshiper. The chief objects of their worship were Shiva and Vishnu, and they spoke and wrote in Tamil, a language understood by everyone. These saints traveled from place to place, spreading their message of love and devotion. Some of them belonged to lower classes, and there was even a woman saint, Andal. Almost all of them disregarded caste inequalities, though they did not try to oppose the caste system outright. The lower castes had been excluded from Vedic scholarship and worship, but the path of bhakti advocated by these saints was open to all, irrespective of caste.

        The bhakti movement not only brought many adherents of Buddhism and Jainism back to Hinduism, but it also won over many tribals. A series of acharyas, led by Nathamuni, collected and systematized the teachings of the Alvars and declared them equivalent to the Vedas. These early saints and their writings began to be worshipped in temples, and a whole set of rituals and ceremonies were elaborated. Many of these are still followed today.

        Many of the tribals from hilly areas became settled agriculturists in river valleys. These areas were often held by Brahmins, who introduced new agricultural techniques, or by temples where tribal gods were assimilated as supporters of Vishnu or Shiva. Expanded agriculture and new temple rituals strengthened the position of rulers and local states, such as the Chola state. The temples also strengthened the position of Brahmins, who supervised the temples and received rich grants of land from the rulers. Thus, the bhakti movement had far-reaching economic and social consequences as well.

        Another popular movement that arose during the twelfth century was the Lingayat or Vir Saiva movement. Its founders, Basava and his nephew Channabasava, lived at the court of the Kalachuri kings of Karnataka. They established their faith after bitter disputes with the Jains. The Lingayats are worshippers of Shiva and strongly opposed the caste system. They rejected fasts, feasts, pilgrimages, and sacrifices. In the social sphere, they opposed child marriage and allowed the remarriage of widows.

        Thus, both in South and North India, the revival and expansion of Hinduism took two forms—renewed emphasis on the Vedas and Vedic worship, on the one hand, accompanied by a powerful literary and intellectual movement, and, on the other, a popular movement based on tantra in North India and bhakti in South India. Both tantra and bhakti disregarded caste inequalities and were open to all.

        At the intellectual level, the most serious challenge to Buddhism and Jainism came from Sankara, who reformulated Hindu philosophy. Sankara was born in Kerala, probably in the ninth century. His life is shrouded in obscurity, and many legends have grown around it. Persecuted by the Jains, it is said that he undertook a triumphant visit to North India, where he defeated his opponents in debates. His victory was completed by a warm welcome from the king on his return to Madurai and the banishment of the Jains from the court.

        Sankara’s philosophy is called Advaita Vedanta, or the doctrine of non-dualism. According to Sankara, God and the created world are one. The differences between them are apparent but not real, arising from ignorance, with maya being a part of it. The way to salvation was through devotion to God, reinforced by the knowledge that God and all created beings are one and the same. Thus, Sankara upheld the Vedas as the fountainhead of true knowledge.

        The path of knowledge proposed by Sankara could be followed by only a few. Sankara did not reject the path of bhakti, through which the devotee merges with God, but for this, the heart had to be purified through jnana (knowledge). It could not, therefore, influence the masses. The acharyas from Nathamuni onwards were all orthodox Brahmins who argued that the path of bhakti was open only to the three upper castes and required dutifully following rituals prescribed by Brahmins and studying the scriptures.

        In the eleventh century, another famous acharya, Ramanuja, tried to assimilate bhakti with the Vedic tradition. He argued that, in order to attain salvation, the grace of God was more important than knowledge of Him. Ramanuja emphasized that the path of Prapatti (total reliance on or surrender to God) was open to all, including the Shudras and Dalits. Thus, Ramanuja tried to build a bridge between the popular bhakti movement and the upper-caste Vedic movement.

        The tradition established by Ramanuja was followed by several thinkers, such as Madhvacharya (tenth century), and in North India, by Ramananda, Vallabhacharya, and others. In this way, bhakti in its popular form became acceptable to all sections of Hindu society by the early sixteenth century.


- The Age of Conflict (Circa 1000-1200)
    The period from 1000 to 1200 saw rapid changes in both West and Central Asia, as well as in northern India. It was these developments that led to the incursion of the Turks into northern India, eventually establishing their rule toward the end of the period.

    By the end of the ninth century, the Abbasid caliphate was in decline. Its place was taken by a series of states ruled by Islamized Turks. The Turks had entered the Abbasid empire during the ninth century as palace-guards and mercenary soldiers. Soon, they emerged as king-makers. As the power of the central government declined, provincial governors began assuming independent status, though for some time, the fiction of unity was maintained by the caliph formally granting the title of aiz-al-temra (Commander of Commanders) to generals who were able to carve out separate spheres of authority. These new rulers initially assumed the title of amir and later that of sultan.

    The continuous incursion of Turkish tribesmen from Central Asia, the mercenary character of the Turkish soldiers who were prepared to switch loyalties and abandon an unsuccessful ruler without much thought, the strife between different Muslim sects, and between different regions made this a restless period. Empires and states rose and fell in rapid succession. In this situation, only a bold warrior and leader, adept in both warfare and withstanding intrigues, could rise to prominence.

    The Turkish tribesmen brought with them the habit of ruthless plunder. Their main mode of warfare consisted of rapid advances and retreats, lightning raids, and attacking any loose body of stragglers. They could do this because of the excellent quality of their horses and their hardihood, allowing them to cover incredible distances on horseback.

    Meanwhile, the breakup of the Gurjara-Pratihara empire led to a phase of political uncertainty in northern India, and a new phase of struggle for domination. As a result, little attention was paid to the emergence of aggressive, expansionist Turkish states on the northwestern border of India and in West Asia.

    Kabul, Qandahar, and the neighboring area to the south called Zabul or Zamindawar, were considered parts of al-Hind (India) until the end of the ninth century. The area had many Buddhist and Hindu shrines, the most important being the 53.5 m colossal statue of Buddha at Bamiyan, with caves for the residence of a thousand monks. The area up to the river Oxus was ruled by many dynasties, some of them claiming descent from Kanishka. These kingdoms, backed by a mixed population of local tribes like the Hunas, Furks, Iranians, and Indians (such as Bhati Rajputs), offered stiff resistance to the Arab efforts to enter the area for tribute, plunder, and slaves. Consequently, there was continuous skirmishing on both sides of the border.

    The Ghaznavids
        Towards the end of the ninth century, Trans-Oxiana, Khurasan, and parts of Iran were being ruled by the Samanids, who were Iranians by descent. The Samanids had to battle continually with non-Muslim Turkish tribesmen on their northern and eastern frontiers. It was during this struggle that a new type of soldier, the ghazi, was born. The battle against the Turks, most of whom worshipped the forces of nature and were heathens in the eyes of the Muslims, was a struggle for religion as well as for the safety of the state. Hence, the ghazi was as much a missionary as a fighter. He acted as a loose auxiliary to the regular armies and made up for his pay by plunder. It was the resourcefulness of the ghazi and his willingness to undergo great privations for the cause that enabled these infant Muslim states to hold their own against the heathen Turks. In time, many Turks became Muslims, but the struggle against renewed incursions of non-Muslim Turkish tribes continued. The Islamized Turkish tribes would later emerge as the greatest defenders and crusaders of Islam, though the love of plunder went hand-in-hand with the defense of Islam.

        Among the Samanid governors was a Turkish slave, Alp-Tigin, who, in time, established an independent kingdom with its capital at Ghazni. The Samanid kingdom soon ended, and the Ghaznavids took over the task of defending Islamic lands from the Central Asian tribesmen.

        It was in this context that Mahmud ascended the throne (998–1030) at Ghazni. Mahmud is considered a hero of Islam by medieval Muslim historians because of his stout defense against the Central Asian Turkish tribal invaders. The ghazi spirit, therefore, further increased during his reign. Secondly, Mahmud was closely associated with the renaissance of the Iranian spirit, which grew rapidly during this period. The proud Iranians had never accepted the Arabic language and culture. The Samanid state had also encouraged the Persian language and literature. A high watermark in the Iranian renaissance was reached with Firdausi’s Shah Namah. Firdausi was the poet laureate at the court of Mahmud. He transported the struggle between Iran and Turan to mythical times and glorified the ancient Iranian heroes. There was a resurgence of Iranian patriotism, and Persian language and culture became the language and culture of the Ghaznavid empire, so much so that Mahmud himself claimed descent from the legendary Iranian king, Afrasiyab. Thus, the Turks became not only Islamized but also Persianized. It was this culture that they were to bring with them to India two centuries later.

        While Mahmud played an important role in the defense of the Islamic states against the Turkish tribes and in the Iranian cultural renaissance, in India, his memory is that of a plunderer and destroyer of temples. Mahmud is said to have made seventeen raids into India. The initial raids were directed against the Hindushahi rulers, who at the time held Peshawar and the Punjab. Their capital was at Udbhanda (Waihind, Peshawar). The Hindushahi rulers had been quick to recognize the danger of the rise of an aggressive, expansionist state on their southwestern border. The Hindushahi ruler, Jayapala, had, in alliance with the displaced Samanid governor of Ghazni, the Bhati ruler of the area around Multan, and the amir of Multan, invaded Ghazni. However, he suffered a defeat, and the coalition he built collapsed. In retaliation, the Ghaznavid ruler laid waste the area up to Kabul and Jalalabad.

        Around 990-91, under Sabuk-Tigin, the Shahis suffered a serious defeat. Following this, the provinces of Kabul and Jalalabad were annexed to Ghazni. As a prince, Mahmud had taken part in these battles. After his accession to the throne (998), he resumed the offensive against the Shahis. The Shahi ruler, Jayapala, had, in the meantime, strengthened his position by bringing Lohavar (Lahore) under his control. Thus, the Shahi rule extended from Peshawar to Punjab.

        In a furious battle near Peshawar in 1001, Jayapala was again defeated. Mahmud advanced to the Shahi capital and thoroughly ravaged it. Peace was made by ceding the territory west of the Indus to Mahmud. Soon after, Jayapala died and was succeeded by his son, Anandpala. According to some later accounts, Jayapala entered a funeral pyre following his defeat because he felt he had disgraced himself. The story that he had been taken prisoner by Mahmud and then released seems doubtful.

        Despite these setbacks, the Shahis were still strong enough to offer serious resistance to Mahmud’s efforts to penetrate into the Punjab. Mahmud also had to counter the attacks of non-Muslim Turks from Central Asia. However, in a decisive battle near the Indus in 1009, Anandpala was defeated, and Mahmud devastated his new capital, Nandana, in the Salt Range, and overran his fort called Nagarkot (wrongly confused with Nagarkot in Himachal, which Mahmud never reached). Anandpala was allowed to rule from Lahore as a feudatory for some time. But in 1015, Mahmud advanced to Lahore, plundered it, and ousted Anandpala. Soon, Ghaznavid territories extended up to the river Jhelum. Earlier, the Muslim kingdom of Multan had also been overrun. However, an attack on Kashmir by Mahmud in 1015 was foiled due to weather conditions.

        Thus, the struggle against the Shahis was prolonged, and the Shahis put up stout resistance. In this struggle, the Shahis were supported only by the Muslim ruler of Multan, who had been harassed by slave-taking raids from Ghazni and belonged to a sect which Mahmud considered heretical, and hence an enemy. It is noteworthy that apparently none of the Rajput rulers came to the aid of the Shahis, although in order to exaggerate the scale of Mahmud’s victory, the seventeenth-century historian, Ferishta, mentions that many Rajput rulers, including those from Delhi, Ajmer, and Kanauj, aided Jayapala in 1001. However, Ajmer had not been founded by then, and Delhi (Dhillika) was a small state. Likewise, the Gurjara-Pratiharas of Kanauj, whose sway had extended over Thanesar at one time, were in a much weakened condition. Thus, the Shahis fought virtually alone.

        By 1015, Mahmud was poised for an attack on the Indo-Gangetic valley. During the next half a dozen years, Mahmud launched a series of expeditions into the Indo-Gangetic plains. These raids were aimed at plundering the rich temples and towns that had amassed wealth over generations. The plundering of this wealth also enabled him to continue his struggle against his enemies in Central Asia. He also did not want to give time to the princes in India to regroup and combine against him. Mahmud’s raids into India alternated with battles in Central Asia. For his plundering raids into India, the ghazis came in handy. Mahmud also posed as a great destroyer of images for the glory of Islam. From the Punjab, Mahmud raided Thanesar, the old capital of Harsha. His most daring raids were against Kanauj in 1018 and Somnath in Gujarat in 1025. In the campaign against Kanauj, he sacked and plundered both Mathura and Kanauj. The following year, he invaded Kalinjar in Bundelkhand and returned loaded with fabulous riches. He was able to do all this with impunity due to the fact that no strong state existed in north India at that time. No attempt was made by Mahmud to annex any of these states.

        Between 1020 and 1025, Mahmud was engaged in Central Asian affairs. In 1025, he made a plan for raiding Somnath, which had a fabulously rich temple and attracted lakhs of pilgrims. It was also a rich port. The objective was also to create a sense of awe and shock among the Rajputs because he marched via Multan and Jaisalmer with a regular cavalry of 30,000. Meeting light opposition on the way, he reached Somnath. The commander of the city fled at his approach, but the citizens put up stout resistance. Mahmud broke the Sivalingam and ordered parts of it brought back with him to Ghazni. Evading the attempts of some Rajput rulers to block him on his way back, he had to counter the marauding bands of Jats in Sind. He returned to Ghazni loaded with immense wealth.

        It is difficult to say whether Mahmud’s attack on Somnath presaged an attack on Rajasthan and Gujarat. Mahmud returned the following year to punish the Jats who had harried him on his return to Ghazni. He died at Ghazni in 1030.

        It is incorrect to dismiss Mahmud as just a raider and plunderer.

        The Ghaznavid conquest of Punjab and Multan completely changed the political situation in North India. The Turks had crossed the chain of mountains defending India in the northwest and could make deeper incursions into the Gangetic heartland at any time. The reason they were not able to extend their conquests into the area for the next 150 years was due to the rapid changes that took place in Central Asia as well as in North India during this period.

        Following the death of Mahmud, a powerful empire, the Seljuk Empire, came into being. The Seljuk Empire included Syria, Iran, and Trans-Oxiana, and contended with the Ghaznavids for control of Khurasan. In a famous battle, Masud, the son of Mahmud, was completely defeated and had to flee to Lahore for refuge. The Ghaznavid Empire now shrank to Ghazni and the Punjab. Although the Ghaznavids continued to make plundering raids into the Gangetic Valley and Rajputana, they were no longer in a position to pose a serious military danger to India. Simultaneously, several new states arose in North India that could counter the Ghaznavid raids.

    The Rajput States
        The rise of a new section called the Rajputs and the controversy about their origins have already been mentioned. With the break-up of the Pratihara Empire, a number of Rajput states came into existence in North India. The most important of these were the Gahadavalas of Kanauj, the Paramaras of Malwa, and the Chauhans of Ajmer. There were also smaller dynasties in different parts of the country, such as the Kalachuris in the area around modern Jabalpur, the Chandellas in Bundelkhand, the Chalukyas of Gujarat, the Tomars of Delhi, etc. Bengal remained under the control of the Palas and, later, the Senas. The Gahadavalas of Kanauj gradually squeezed the Palas out of Bihar.

        At its height, the Gahadvala kingdom extended from Mongyr in Bihar to Delhi. The greatest ruler in the dynasty was Govind Chandra, who ruled in the first half of the twelfth century. He made Kanauj his capital, with Banaras remaining a second capital. Persian sources of the time call Govind Chandra the greatest ruler of Hindustan. The Gahadavalas are reputed to be the greatest defenders against the continued Ghaznavid raids into the doab. Govind Chandra was succeeded by Jai Chandra, who had to contend with the rising power of the Chauhans.

        The Chauhans, who had served under the rulers of Gujarat, established their capital at Nadol towards the end of the tenth century. The greatest ruler in the dynasty was, perhaps, Vigraharaj, who captured Chittor, established Ajmer (Ajayameru), and made it his capital. He built a Sanskrit College at Ajmer, and the Anasagar lake there. Like the Gahadavalas, the Chauhans, too, offered stout resistance to the Ghaznavid raids. Vigraharaj captured Delhi (Dhillika) from the Tomars in 1151 but allowed them to rule it as feudatories. Vigraharaj also came into conflict with the Paramaras of Malwa, where the most famous ruler, known in legend, was Bhoja. Both Vigraharaj and Bhoja were patrons of poets and scholars. Vigraharaj himself wrote a Sanskrit drama. Bhoja had to fight his neighbours to the north as well as to the south. He is credited with writing books on philosophy, poetics, yoga, and medicine.

        The most famous among the Chauhan rulers was Prithviraj III, who ascended the throne at the young age of eleven in or about 1177, but took the reins of administration in his hands when he was sixteen. He immediately embarked on a vigorous policy of expansion and brought many of the smaller Rajput states under his sway. However, he was not successful in his struggle against the Chalukyan ruler of Gujarat. This forced him to move towards the Ganga Valley. He led an expedition in Bundelkhand against its capital, Mahoba. It was in this struggle that the famous warriors, Alha and Udal, lost their lives. The Chandel ruler of Mahoba is said to have been supported in this struggle by Jai Chandra of Kanauj. The Gahadavalas had also contested the attempt of the Chauhans to control Delhi and the Punjab. It was these rivalries which made it impossible for the Rajput rulers to join hands to oust the Ghaznavids from the Punjab.

        The basis of Rajput society was the clan. Every clan traced its descent from a common ancestor, real or imaginary. The clans generally dominated a compact territory. Sometimes, these settlements were based on units of 12, 24, 48, or 84 villages. The chief would allot land in the villages to his sub-chiefs, who, in turn, would allot it to individual Rajput warriors for the maintenance of their family and horses. Attachment to land, family, and honor (maan) was a characteristic of the Rajputs. Each Rajput state was supposed to be ruled over by the rana or rawat in conjunction with his chiefs, who were generally his blood brothers. Though their fiefs were supposed to be held at the pleasure of the ruler, the Rajput notion of sanctity of land did not permit their resumption by the ruler, except in special circumstances, such as rebellion, absence of an heir, etc.

        The Rajput organization of society had both advantages and disadvantages. One advantage was the sense of brotherhood and egalitarianism which prevailed among the Rajputs. But the same trait made it difficult to maintain discipline among them. Feuds which continued for several generations were another weakness of the Rajputs. But their basic weakness was their tendency to form exclusive groups, each claiming superiority over the others. They were not prepared to extend the sense of brotherhood to non-Rajputs. This led to a growing gap between the Rajput ruling groups and the people, most of whom were non-Rajputs. The Rajputs form only about ten percent of the population in Rajasthan even today. The proportion of the Rajputs to the total population of the areas they dominated could not have been much higher during the eleventh and twelfth centuries.

        The Rajputs treated war as a sport. This and the struggle for land and cattle led to continuous warfare among the various Rajput states. The ideal ruler was one who led his armies after celebrating the Dussehra festival to invade the territories of his neighbors. The people, both in the villages and in the cities, suffered the most from this policy.

        Most of the Rajput rulers of the time were champions of Hinduism, though some of them also patronized Jainism. They gave rich donations and grants of land to Brahmins and temples. The Rajput rulers stood forth as protectors of the privileges of the Brahmins and of the caste system. Thus, the system of charging a lower rate of land revenue for Brahmins continued in some Rajput states till their merger in the Indian Union. In return for these and other concessions, the Brahmins were prepared to recognize the Rajputs as descendants of the old lunar and solar families of the kshatriyas, which were believed to have become extinct.

        The period after the eighth century, and particularly between the tenth and twelfth centuries, may be regarded as marking a climax in temple building activity in North India. Some of the most magnificent temples that we have today can be traced back to this period. The style of temple construction which came into prominence was called the nagara. Though found almost all over India, the main centres of construction in this style were in North India and the Deccan. Its main characteristic feature was the tall curved spiral roof over the garbhagriha or the deity room (deul). The main room was generally square, though projections could be made from each of its sides. An anteroom (mandapa) was added to the sanctum sanctorum and sometimes the temple was enclosed by high walls which had lofty gates. The most representative temples of this type are the group of temples at Khajuraho in Madhya Pradesh and at Bhubaneshwar in Orissa. The Parsvanatha temple, the Visvanatha temple, and the Kandarya Mahadeo temple at Khajuraho illustrate this style in its richest and most finished form. The rich and elaborate carvings on the walls of the temples show that the art of sculpture had attained its height. Most of these temples were built by the Chandellas, who ruled the area from the beginning of the ninth to the end of the thirteenth century.

        In Orissa, the most magnificent examples of temple architecture of the time are the Lingaraja temple (eleventh century) and the Sun temple of Konark (thirteenth century). The famous Jaganatha temple at Puri also belongs to this period.

        A large number of temples were built at various other places in North India—Mathura, Banaras, Dilwara (Abu), etc. Like the temples in South India, temples in North India also tended to become more and more elaborate. They were the centers of social and cultural life. Some of them, such as the temple of Somnath, became extremely wealthy. They ruled over many villages and took part in business activities. In addition to temples, the Rajput rulers also built many fine palaces, powerful forts, and works of public benefit, such as stepped wells (zolis), bunds, etc.

        The Rajput rulers also patronized arts and letters. Many books and plays were written in Sanskrit during the period under their patronage. Vastupala, the famous minister of the Chalukyan ruler Bhima in Gujarat, was a writer and a patron of scholars and the builder of the beautiful Jain temple at Mt. Abu. Ujjain and Dhara, the capitals of the Paramara rulers, were famous centres for Sanskrit learning. Many works were written in Apabhramsha and Prakrit, which represented the languages of the region. The Jain scholars made significant contributions in this direction, the most famous among them being Hemachandra, who wrote both in Sanskrit and Apabhramsha. With the revival of Brahmanism, Sanskrit supplanted Apabhramsha and Prakrit among the upper classes. However, literature in these languages, which were closer to the spoken languages, continued to be produced. The modern North Indian languages, such as Hindi, Bengali, and Marathi, began to emerge out of these popular languages during this period.

    The Turkish Conquest of North India
        After the Ghaznavid Conquest of the Punjab, two distinct patterns of relations between Muslims and Hindus emerged. One was the lure for plunder, which led to raids into the Gangetic valley and Rajputana by the successors of Mahmud. The rulers of the Rajput states put up spirited resistance against these raids and won victories against the Turks on several occasions. But the Ghaznavid state was no longer very powerful, and the gaining of several victories against it in local battles made the Rajput rulers more complacent.

        At the second level, Muslim traders were allowed and even welcomed in the country since they helped strengthen and augment India’s trade with Central and West Asian countries, thereby increasing the income of the state. Colonies of Muslim traders sprang up in some towns in north India. In the wake of these traders came a number of Muslim religious preachers called Sufis to Punjab. The Sufis preached the gospel of love, faith, and dedication to the one God. While they primarily directed their preachings towards the Muslim settlers, they also influenced some Hindus. Thus, a process of interaction between Islam and Hindu religion and society began. Lahore became a center of Arabic and Persian languages and literature. Hindu generals, such as Tilak, a barber by caste, commanded the Ghaznavid armies, which also recruited Hindu (Jat) soldiers.

        These two processes might have continued indefinitely but for another large-scale change in the political situation in Central Asia. Towards the middle of the twelfth century, another group of Turkish tribesmen, who were partly Buddhist and partly pagan, shattered the power of the Seljuk Turks. In the resulting vacuum, two new powers rose to prominence: the Khwarazmian empire based in Iran and the Ghurid empire based in Ghur, northwest Afghanistan. The Ghurids had started as vassals of Ghazni but soon threw off their yoke. The power of the Ghurids increased under Sultan Alauddin, who earned the title of “the world burner” (Jahan-Soz) because, in the middle of the twelfth century, he ravaged and burned Ghazni to the ground in revenge for the treatment of his brothers there. The rising power of the Khwarazmian empire severely limited the Ghurids’ ambitions in Central Asia. Khurasan, which was the bone of contention between the two, was soon conquered by Khwarazm Shah. This left the Ghurids with no option but to look for expansion towards India.

        In 1173, Shahabuddin Muhammad (1173–1206), also known as Muizzuddin Muhammad bin Sam, ascended the throne at Ghazni, while his elder brother ruled at Ghur. Proceeding by way of the Gomal pass, Muizzuddin Muhammad conquered Multan and Uchch. In 1178, he attempted to penetrate Gujarat by marching across the Rajputana desert, but the Gujarat ruler completely routed him in a battle near Mount Abu, and Muizzuddin Muhammad was lucky to escape alive. He now realized the necessity of creating a suitable base in Punjab before venturing on the conquest of India. Accordingly, he launched a campaign against the Ghaznavid possessions in the Punjab. By 1190, Muizzuddin Muhammad had conquered Peshawar, Lahore, and Sialkot, and was poised for a thrust towards Delhi and the Gangetic doab.

        Meanwhile, events had not been standing still in north India. The Chauhan power had been steadily growing. The Chauhan rulers had defeated and killed a large number of Turks who had tried to invade Rajasthan, most probably from the Punjab side. They had also captured Delhi (called Dhillika) from the Tomars around the middle of the century. The expansion of the Chauhan power towards the Punjab brought them into conflict with the Ghaznavid rulers of the area.

    The Battle of Tarain
        Thus, a battle between these two ambitious rulers, Muizzuddin Muhammad and Prithviraj, was inevitable. The conflict started with rival claims for Tabarhinda. In the battle fought at Tarain in 1191, the Ghurid forces were completely routed, with Muizzuddin Muhammad’s life being saved by a young Khalji horseman. Prithviraj now pushed on to Tabarhinda and conquered it after a twelve-month siege. Little attempt was made by Prithviraj to oust the Ghurids from Punjab. Perhaps he felt that this was another of the recurrent Turkish raids and that the Ghurid ruler would be content to rule over Punjab. This gave Muizzuddin Muhammad time to regroup his forces and make another bid for India the following year. He rejected the proposal, said to be made by Prithviraj, to leave Punjab under the possession of the Ghurid ruler.

        The second battle of Tarain in 1192 is regarded as one of the turning points in Indian history. Muizzuddin Muhammad had made careful preparations for the contest. It is said that he marched with 1,206,000 men, including a force of heavy cavalry fully equipped with steel coats and armor, and 10,000 mounted archers. It is not correct to think that Prithviraj was negligent in his affairs and only realized the situation when it was too late. While Skanda, the general of the last victorious campaign, was engaged elsewhere, Prithviraj soon realized the nature of the Ghurid threat and appealed to all the rajas of northern India for help. Many rajas sent contingents to help him, but Jaichandra, the ruler of Kanauj, stayed away. The legend that this was because Prithviraj had abducted Jaichandra’s daughter, Sanyogita, who was in love with him, is not accepted by many historians. The story was written much later as a romance by the poet Chand Bardai and includes many improbable events. As we have seen, there had been an old rivalry between the two states, so it is not surprising that Jaichandra stayed away.

        Prithviraj is said to have fielded a force of 300,000, including a large body of cavalry and 300 elephants. The strength of the forces on both sides may have been exaggerated. The numerical strength of the Indian forces was probably greater, but the Turkish army was better organized and led. The battle was mainly a clash of cavalry. The superior organization, skill, and speed of movements of the Turkish cavalry and their mounted archers and heavy cavalry ultimately decided the issue. A large number of Indian soldiers lost their lives. Prithviraj escaped but was captured near Saraswati (Sirsa). The Turkish armies captured the fortresses of Hansi, Saraswati, and Samana, then attacked and captured Ajmer. Prithviraj was allowed to rule over Ajmer for some time, as coins from this period bear the legend “Prithvirajadeva” on one side and “Sri Muhammad Sam” on the other.

        Soon after, Prithviraj was executed on charges of “conspiracy,” and Prithviraj’s son succeeded him. Delhi was also restored to its Tomar ruler, but this policy was reversed soon after. The ruler of Delhi was ousted, and Delhi was made a base for further Turkish advance into the Ganga valley. Following a rebellion, a Muslim army recaptured Ajmer and installed a Turkish general there. Prithviraj’s son moved to Ranthambor and founded a new powerful Chauhan kingdom there.

        Thus, the Delhi area and eastern Rajasthan passed under Turkish rule.

    Turkish Conquest of the Ganga Valley
        Bihar and Bengal
            Between 1192 and 1206, Turkish rule extended over the Ganga-Jamuna Doab and its neighboring regions, including Bihar and Bengal. To establish control in the Doab, the Turks first had to defeat the powerful Gahadavala kingdom of Kanauj. The Gahadavala ruler, Jaichandra, had ruled peacefully for two decades but was not a very capable warrior, having earlier suffered a defeat at the hands of the Sena king of Bengal.

            After the Battle of Tarain, Muizzuddin returned to Ghazni, leaving Indian affairs in the hands of his trusted slave, Qutbuddin Aibak. Over the next two years, the Turks overran parts of the upper Doab without opposition from the Gahadavalas. In 1194, Muizzuddin returned to India, crossing the Yamuna with 50,000 cavalry to move towards Kanauj. A fiercely contested battle was fought at Chandawar near Kanauj, where Jaichandra was killed by an arrow, and his army was defeated. Muizzuddin then advanced to Banaras, destroying numerous temples. The Turks established control over a vast territory up to the borders of Bihar.

            Thus, the battles of Tarain and Chandawar laid the foundation for Turkish rule in northern India. However, consolidating this conquest took nearly fifty years.

            Muizzuddin lived until 1206. During his reign, he occupied the forts of Bayana and Gwalior to guard Delhi’s southern flank. Soon after, Aibak conquered Kalinjar, Mahoba, and Khajuraho from the Chandel rulers.

            With a base in the Doab, the Turks launched raids into neighboring areas. Aibak defeated Bhima III, the ruler of Gujarat, ravaging Anhilwara and other towns. However, the Turks were not strong enough to rule such far-flung areas.

            The Turks found more success in the east. Bakhtiyar Khalji, a Khalji officer, was appointed in charge of areas beyond Banaras. He frequently raided Bihar, which was then largely unprotected. During these raids, he destroyed famous Buddhist monasteries in Bihar, including Nalanda and Vikramasila, and accumulated wealth and followers. He also gathered information about routes to Bengal, a rich land known for its internal resources and flourishing trade.

            After careful preparations, Bakhtiyar Khalji marched towards Nadia, where the Sena ruler Lakshmana Sena had built a palace and gone on pilgrimage. Disguised as a horse-merchant, Bakhtiyar Khalji attacked the palace, creating confusion. Taken by surprise, Lakshmana Sena escaped, and Bakhtiyar’s forces soon overpowered the garrison. The wealth of Lakshmana, including his family, was captured. Bakhtiyar then occupied Lakhnauti, the Sena capital, without opposition. Lakshmana Sena retreated to Sonargaon in southern Bengal, where he continued to rule.

            Although Muizzuddin appointed Bakhtiyar Khalji as Bengal’s governor, Bakhtiyar ruled largely as an independent ruler. However, his reign was short-lived. After foolishly undertaking an expedition into the Brahmaputra valley, Bakhtiyar’s army faced defeat in Assam. The Turkish forces were exhausted by hunger and illness, and when they were trapped between a river and the Assamese army, they suffered a total defeat. Bakhtiyar barely escaped with a few followers, but his health was broken, and he died after being stabbed by one of his own officers.

            Meanwhile, Muizzuddin and his brother sought to expand the Ghurid empire into Central Asia. However, in 1203, Muizzuddin suffered a disastrous defeat against the Khwarizmi empire, leading him to focus solely on India. This allowed the rise of a Turkish state centered in India. After the defeat, the Khokhars, a tribe in western Punjab, revolted, and Muizzuddin led a large-scale campaign against them in 1206. He massacred the Khokhars, which silenced their rebellion. On his way back to Ghazni, Muizzuddin was killed by a Muslim fanatic belonging to a rival sect.

            Muizzuddin Muhammad bin Sam is often compared to Mahmud of Ghazni. While Mahmud had a larger empire and was more successful in Central Asia, Muizzuddin’s political achievements in India were greater. Mahmud’s conquest of Punjab paved the way for Muizzuddin’s successes in northern India. However, the conditions facing the two rulers were very different, making direct comparisons difficult. Despite using the slogan of Islam to justify their conquests and looting, neither ruler was truly motivated by religious zeal, as they allowed defeated rulers to retain their kingdoms unless it was necessary to annex them.

    CAUSES OF THE DEFEAT OF THE RAJPUTS
        The defeat of the leading states of north India within a short span of about 15 years by the Turkish armies requires some explanation. It can be stated as an axiom that a country is conquered by another only when it suffers from social and political weaknesses or becomes economically and militarily backward compared to its neighbors. Recent research shows that the Turks did not have superior weapons compared to the Indians. The iron stirrup, which had changed the mode of warfare in Europe, had spread in India from the 8th century onwards. The Turkish bows could shoot arrows over longer distances, but the Indian bows were considered more accurate and deadly, with arrowheads generally dipped in poison. In hand-to-hand combat, Indian swords were considered the best in the world. The Indians also had the advantage of elephants. Perhaps the Turks had horses that were swifter and more sturdy than the horses imported into India.

        The weaknesses of the Indians were social and organizational. The growth of feudalism, i.e., the rise of local landed elements and chiefs, had weakened the administrative structure and military organization of the Indian states. The rulers had to depend more on various chiefs who rarely acted in coordination and quickly dispersed to their areas after battle. On the other hand, the tribal structure of the Turks and the growth of the Iqta and Ahalisa systems enabled the Turks to maintain large standing armies that could be kept in the field for a long time. The Indians were not accustomed to moving as an organized body of horsemen that could cover long distances and fight and maneuver. Nor, it seems, did the Rajputs have large bodies of mounted archers or heavily armed cavalry. But for these factors, the Rajput states, many of which had greater human and physical resources at their disposal than the Ghaznavid and Ghurid empires, would not have suffered defeat or would have been able to recover if they had been defeated in battle.

        The social and organizational structure of the Turks gave them many advantages. The Iqta system, which grew slowly in West Asia, implied that a Turkish chief was allotted a piece of land as an Iqta from which he could collect the land revenues and taxes due to the state. In return, he had to maintain a body of troops for the service of the ruler. The grant was not hereditary and was held at the pleasure of the Sultan, who could transfer him to any place. The Sultan drew revenues directly from pieces of land known as Ahalisa. This enabled him to maintain a large standing army. While states rose and fell in both West Asia and India, in West Asia, unlike the Rajput states, the armed forces were more highly centralized in each state. Many of the Turkish officers were slaves who had been trained for warfare, grew in the Sultan’s service, and could be trusted by the Sultan.

        In terms of personal bravery, the Rajputs were in no way inferior to the Turks. In this context, the role of religion and caste in the military organization should not be unduly exaggerated. While the Turks were imbued with the ‘ghazi’ spirit, the Rajputs considered retreat in battle to be dishonorable. Caste did not prevent non-Rajputs or the Avarna (lower castes) from participating in battles, so Rajput armies were often larger in number than those fielded by the Turks.

        Finally, the Rajput defeat at the hands of Muizzuddin Muhammad should be viewed in the context of the past few centuries. From the end of the 10th century, the Turks had started infiltrating India. The Rajputs did put up spirited and prolonged resistance and defeated the Turkish armies several times. However, the Rajputs lacked what might be called ‘strategic vision’. Once the outer bastions of India—Kabul and Lahore—had fallen to the Turks, no concerted attempt was made by the Rajputs to recover them. Thus, little effort was made to push the Ghaznavids out of the Punjab. The Rajputs’ focus remained fixed on India, and they paid little attention to developments outside, especially in Central Asia, which had often played a key role in shaping the history of India.


- The Delhi Sultanate—I (Circa 1200-1400)
    I. The Mamluk Sultans (Thirteenth Century)
        Some of the factors that enabled the Turks to extend their conquest from the Punjab and Multan into the Ganga valley, and even to overrun Bihar and parts of Bengal, have been mentioned in the previous chapter. For almost one hundred years after that, the Delhi Sultanate, as the state ruled by these invaders was called, was hard-pressed to maintain itself in the face of foreign invasions, internal conflicts among the Turkish leaders, and the attempts of the dispossessed and subordinate Rajput rulers and chiefs to regain their independence and, if possible, oust the Turks. The Turkish rulers were successful in overcoming these difficulties, and by the end of the century, they were in a position to extend their rule over Malwa and Gujarat and to penetrate into the Deccan and South India. The effects of the establishment of Turkish rule in northern India began to be felt within a hundred years all over India, resulting in far-reaching changes in society, administration, and cultural life.

    STRUGGLE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A STRONG MONARCHY
        Muizzuddin (Muhammad of Ghur) was succeeded by Qutbuddin Aibak, a Turkish slave, in 1206. He had played an important part in the expansion of the Turkish Sultanate in India after the Battle of Tarain. Another slave of Muizzuddin, Yalduz, succeeded at Ghazni. As the ruler of Ghazni, Yalduz claimed to rule over Delhi as well.

        However, this claim was not accepted by Aibak, who ruled from Lahore. From this time onward, the Sultanate severed its links with Ghazni. This was fortunate, as it helped prevent India from being drawn into Central Asian politics. It also enabled the Delhi Sultanate to develop independently without depending on countries outside India.

    Iltutmish (1210-1236)
        In 1210, Aibak died of injuries received from a fall while playing changan (polo). He was succeeded by Iltutmish, who was the son-in-law of Aibak. However, before assuming the throne, Iltutmish had to fight and defeat Aibak’s son. Thus, the principle of heredity, of a son succeeding his father, was checked at the outset.

        Iltutmish must be regarded as the real consolidator of the Turkish conquests in north India. At the time of his accession, Ali Mardan Khan had declared himself the king of Bengal and Bihar, while Qubacha, a fellow slave of Aibak, had declared himself an independent ruler of Multan and seized Lahore and parts of the Punjab. Initially, even some of Iltutmish’s fellow officers near Delhi were reluctant to accept his authority. The Rajputs also found an opportunity to assert their independence. Thus, Kalinjar, Gwalior, and the entire eastern Rajasthan, including Ajmer and Bayana, threw off the Turkish yoke.

        During the early years of his reign, Iltutmish concentrated on the northwest. A new danger arose when the Khwarazm Shah conquered Ghazni. The Khwarazm empire was the most powerful state in Central Asia at this time, and its eastern frontier extended to the Indus. To avert this danger, Iltutmish marched to Lahore and occupied it. In 1218, the Khwarazm empire was destroyed by the Mongols, who founded one of the strongest empires in history, extending from China to the shores of the Mediterranean Sea and from the Caspian Sea to the river Jaxartes. The threat it posed to India and its effects on the Delhi Sultanate will be discussed in a subsequent section. While the Mongols were occupied elsewhere, Iltutmish ousted Qubacha from Multan and Uchch. The frontiers of the Delhi Sultanate thus reached up to the Indus once again.

        Secure in the west, Iltutmish was able to turn his attention elsewhere. In Bengal and Bihar, a man named Iwaz, who had taken the title of Sultan Ghiyasuddin, had assumed independence. He was a generous and able ruler, known for building many public works. While he conducted raids on the territories of his neighbors, the Sena rulers of East Bengal and the Hindu rulers of Orissa and Kamrup (Assam) maintained their sway. In 1226-27, Iwaz was defeated and killed in a battle with Iltutmish’s son near Lakhnauti. Bengal and Bihar came under the suzerainty of Delhi once again, but they remained a difficult charge and repeatedly challenged Delhi’s authority.

        At about the same time, Iltutmish took steps to recover Gwalior and Bayana. Ajmer and Nagor remained under his control. He sent expeditions against Ranthambhor and Jalor to reassert his suzerainty. He also attacked Nagda, the capital of Mewar (about 22 km from Udaipur), but had to retreat when the Gujarat armies arrived to aid the Rana. In retaliation, Iltutmish sent an expedition against the Chalukyas of Gujarat, but it was repulsed with losses.

    Raziva (1236-39)
        During his last year, Iltutmish was worried about the problem of succession. He considered none of his surviving sons to be worthy of the throne. After anxious consideration, he finally decided to nominate his daughter, Raziya, for the throne and induced the nobles and theologians (ulama) to agree to the nomination. Although women had ruled as queens both in ancient Iran and Egypt and had acted as regents during the minority rule of princes, the nomination of a woman in preference to sons was a novel step.

        To assert her claim, Raziya had to contend against her brothers as well as the powerful Turkish nobles and could rule for only three years. Though brief, her rule had a number of interesting features. It marked the beginning of a struggle for power between the monarchy and the Turkish chiefs, sometimes called ‘the forty’ or ‘chahalgani.’ Iltutmish had shown great deference to these Turkish chiefs. After his death, these chiefs, drunk with power and arrogance, wanted to install a puppet on the throne whom they could control. They soon discovered that, though a woman, Raziya was not prepared to play their game.

        She discarded female apparel and started holding court with her face unveiled. She even hunted and led the army in war. Iltutmish’s wazir, Nizam-ul-Mulk Junaidi, who had opposed her elevation to the throne and backed a rebellion of nobles against her, was defeated and forced to flee. She sent an expedition against Ranthambhor to control the Rajputs and successfully established law and order throughout her kingdom.

        However, her attempt to create a party of nobles loyal to her and to raise a non-Turk to high office led to opposition. The Turkish nobles accused her of violating feminine modesty and being too friendly with an Abyssinian noble, Yaqut Khan. Yaqut Khan had been appointed Superintendent of the Royal Stable, which implied closeness to the sovereign. But contemporary writers have not accused Raziya of any personal intimacy with him. The charge that he used to lift her onto her horse is wrong, as Raziya always appeared in public on an elephant, not on horseback.

        Rebellions broke out at Lahore and Sirhind. Raziya personally led an expedition against Lahore, compelling the governor to submit. On the way to Sirhind, an internal rebellion broke out, in which Yaqut Khan was killed, and Raziya was imprisoned at Tabarhinda. However, Raziya won over her captor, Altunia, and after marrying him, made a renewed attempt on Delhi. She fought valiantly but was defeated and killed in a forest by bandits while she was fleeing.

    Era of Balban (1246-87)
        The struggle between the monarchy and the Turkish chiefs continued until one of the Turkish chiefs, Ulugh Khan, known later as Balban, gradually arrogated all power to himself and finally ascended the throne in 1265. During the earlier period, Balban held the position of naib (deputy) to Nasiruddin Mahmud, a younger son of Iltutmish, whom Balban had helped secure the throne in 1246. Balban further strengthened his position by marrying one of his daughters to the young sultan. The growing authority of Balban alienated many of the Turkish chiefs, who had hoped to maintain their former power and influence in the government, as Nasiruddin Mahmud was young and inexperienced.

        They hatched a conspiracy in 1253 and ousted Balban from his position. Balban was replaced by Izzuddin Raihan, an Indian Muslim. Although the Turkish chiefs wanted all power and authority to remain in their hands, they consented to Raihan’s appointment because they could not agree among themselves on which one of them should succeed to Balban’s post. Balban agreed to step aside but carefully continued to build his own group. Within one and a half years of his dismissal, he managed to win over some of his opponents. Balban then made preparations for a military showdown.

        It seems that he had also established some contacts with the Mongols, who had overrun a large part of the Punjab. Sultan Mahmud bowed to the superior strength of Balban’s group and dismissed Raihan. After some time, Raihan was defeated and killed. Balban eliminated many of his other rivals by fair or foul means. He even went so far as to assume the royal insignia, the chaher, but did not assume the throne himself, probably due to the sentiments of the Turkish chiefs.

        In 1265, Sultan Mahmud died. Some historians believe that Balban poisoned the young king and also had his sons killed to clear the way for his own ascent to the throne. Balban’s methods were often harsh and undesirable, but there is no doubt that with his accession to the throne, an era of strong, centralized government began.

        Balban constantly sought to increase the prestige and power of the monarchy, believing that it was the only way to face the internal and external dangers confronting him. During this age, authority and power were thought to be the privilege of those born into noble houses or those with an ancient pedigree. Balban tried to strengthen his claim to the throne by declaring himself a descendant of the legendary Iranian king Afrasiyab.

        To prove his noble lineage, Balban stood as the ‘champion of the Turkish nobility.’ He refused to entertain anyone for important government posts who was not from a noble family, thus virtually excluding Indian Muslims from positions of power. Sometimes, he went to ridiculous lengths; for example, he refused to grant an audience to an important trader simply because he was not high-born. The historian Barani, a great champion of the Turkish nobles, attributed the following words to Balban: “Whenever I see a base-born ignoble man, my eyes burn, and I reach in anger for my sword (to kill him).” We do not know if Balban actually said these words, but they show his attitude towards the low-born, whether Turk or non-Turk.

        While claiming to be a champion of Turkish nobility, Balban was not prepared to share power with anyone, not even his own family members. His despotism was such that he was not open to criticism, even from his supporters. Balban was determined to finally break the power of the chahalgani (Turkish nobles) and exalt the power and prestige of the monarchy. He did not hesitate to poison his cousin, Sher Khan, to achieve this goal. At the same time, to win the confidence of the public, he administered justice with extreme impartiality. Even the highest in the land were not spared if they transgressed his authority.

        To keep himself well-informed, Balban appointed spies in every department. He also organized a strong, centralized army to deal with internal disturbances and repel the Mongols, who had entrenched themselves in the Punjab and posed a serious danger to the Delhi Sultanate. He reorganized the military department (Diwan-i-Arz) and pensioned off soldiers who were no longer fit for service. Since many of these soldiers were Turks who had come to India during the time of Iltutmish, they raised a hue and cry against this decision, and Balban had to relent to some extent.

        The law and order situation in the area around Delhi and in the Doab had deteriorated. In the Ganga-Jamuna Doab and Awadh, the roads were infested with robbers and dacoits, so much so that communication with the eastern areas had become difficult. Some Rajput zamindars had set up forts in the area and defied the government. Near Delhi, the Mewatis had become so bold as to plunder people as far as the outskirts of the city. To deal with these elements, Balban adopted a policy of ‘blood and iron.’ The Meos were ruthlessly hunted down and killed, forests around Delhi were cleared, and many military outposts (thanas) were established.

        By these harsh methods, Balban controlled the situation. To impress the people with the strength of his government and to awe them, Balban maintained a magnificent court. Whenever he went out, he was surrounded by a large force of bodyguards with drawn swords. He refused to laugh and joke in the court and even gave up drinking wine so that no one might see him in a non-serious mood. To emphasize that the nobles were not his equals, he insisted on the ceremony of sajada and paeos (prostration and kissing the monarch’s feet). These and many other ceremonies, which he copied from Iranian culture, were considered un-Islamic. However, little objection could be raised because, at the time when most Muslim states in Central and West Asia had been defeated by the Mongols, Balban and the Sultanate of Delhi stood out as the champions of Islam.

        Although Balban had a strong army, he did not lead any distant expeditions except the one to Bengal, out of fear of Mongol attacks on Delhi. But he exercised his army by organizing elaborate hunting expeditions.

        Balban died in 1286. He was undoubtedly one of the main architects of the Sultanate of Delhi, particularly its form of government and institutions. By asserting the power of the monarchy, Balban strengthened the Delhi Sultanate. However, he could not fully defend northern India against the Mongol invasions. Moreover, by largely excluding non-Turks from positions of power and authority and trying to base the government on a very narrow group, he caused dissatisfaction, leading to fresh disturbances after his death.

    The Mongols and the Problem of the Northwest Frontier
        Due to its natural boundaries, India has been safeguarded during most of its history from external invasions. It was only in the northwest that India was vulnerable. As we have seen, it was through the mountain passes of this area that the Turks, like the earlier invaders such as the Huns, Scythians, etc., had been able to penetrate into India and establish an empire there. The configuration of these mountains was such that in order to prevent an invader from reaching the fertile valleys of the Punjab and Sindh, it was necessary to control the area extending from Kabul to Ghazni and Qandahar. The control of this area, flanked by the Hindukush, was important because it was the main route for the arrival of reinforcements from Central Asia.

        Due to the fluid situation in West Asia, the Delhi Sultanate was not able to attain these frontiers, posing a persistent danger to India.

        With the rise of the Khwarazmian empire, the control of the Ghurids over Kabul, Qandahar, and Ghazni had been lost, and the boundary of the Khwarazmian empire had reached the river Indus. It appeared that a struggle for the mastery of north India was about to begin between the Khwarazmian rulers and the successor of Qutbuddin Aibak. Just then, an even bigger danger made its appearance. This was the arrival of Chinggis Khan, the Mongol leader, who prided himself on calling himself ‘the scourge of God’. The Mongols attacked the Khwarazmian empire in 1218. They ruthlessly sacked flourishing cities from the Jaxartes to the Caspian Sea and from Ghazni to Iran, and ravaged the countryside. Many Turkish soldiers went over to the side of the Mongols. The Mongols deliberately used terror as an instrument of war. Whenever a city refused to surrender or was conquered after putting up resistance, all the soldiers and a large number of their chiefs were slaughtered, and their women and children sold into slavery. Nor were even the civilians spared. Craftsmen among them were picked out for service with the Mongol army, while other able-bodied men were drafted into labor levies to be used against other towns. All this led to a serious setback to the economy and cultural life of the area. But in due course, the establishment of peace, law, and order in the area by the Mongols, and the safeguarding of the trade routes from China to the shores of the Mediterranean Sea, started a process of recovery. However, several generations passed before Iran, Turan, and Iraq were able to recover their previous prosperity. Meanwhile, the Mongol onslaught had serious repercussions on the Sultanate of Delhi. Many princes and a large number of scholars, theologians, learned men, and persons from leading families flocked to Delhi. As the only remaining Muslim state in the area, the Delhi Sultanate thus became the center of Islam. Thus, there was an emphasis on Islam as the only bond of unity among different sections of the new rulers. It also implied that the Turkish invaders, who were cut off from their homelands and deprived of reinforcements, were compelled to adapt themselves to the Indian situation as quickly as possible.

        The Mongol threat to India appeared in 1221. After the defeat of the Khwarazmian ruler, the crown prince, Jalaluddin, fled and was pursued by Chinggis Khan. Jalaluddin fought a brave battle on the bank of the Indus, and after being defeated, he plunged his horse into the river and crossed over to India. Although Chinggis loitered near the river Indus for three months, he decided not to cross into India, preferring to give his attention to conquering the remaining portions of the Khwarazmian empire. It is difficult to say what would have happened if Chinggis had decided to invade India. The Turkish state in India was still too feeble and disorganized. Possibly, India would have had to endure death, destruction, and devastation on a scale far exceeding what it had to endure at the hands of the Turks. Iltutmish, who was ruling at Delhi at the time, tried to appease the Mongols by politely refusing a request from Jalaluddin for asylum. Jalaluddin remained for some time in the area between Lahore and the river Sutlej, that is, the Cis-Sutlej area. This resulted in a series of Mongol attacks. The river Indus ceased to be India’s western boundary.

        Lahore and Multan were a bone of contention between Iltutmish and his rivals, Yalduz and Qubacha. Yalduz and Qubacha exhausted themselves in the fight for Lahore. Ultimately, Iltutmish was able to conquer both Lahore and Multan, and thus formed a fairly strong line of defense against the Mongols.

        After the death of Chinggis Khan in 1227, the mighty Mongol empire was divided among his sons. During this period, the Mongols under Batu Khan overran Russia. However, till 1240, the Mongols desisted from making any encroachments in India beyond the river Indus. The major reason for this was the Mongol preoccupation with Iraq and Syria. This gave breathing room to the Sultans of Delhi to organize a centralized state and a strong army in India.

        In 1241, Tair Bahadur, the commander of the Mongol forces in Herat, Ghur, Ghazni, and Turkestan, appeared at Lahore. Despite urgent appeals to Delhi, no help was forthcoming, and the governor fled from the town. The Mongols sacked and almost depopulated the town. In 1245, the Mongols invested Multan, and only a speedy march by Balban saved the situation. When Balban was busy dealing with the threat to his position from his rivals led by Imaduddin Raihan, the Mongols found an opportunity to capture and hold Lahore. Even some Turkish nobles, including Sher Khan, the governor of Multan, threw in their lot with the Mongols. Although Balban fought against the Mongols stoutly, the frontiers of Delhi gradually receded from the river Jhelum to the Beas, which flowed between the rivers Ravi and Sutlej. Multan was recovered by Balban, but it remained under heavy Mongol pressure.

        It was this situation that Balban had to face as a ruler. Balban adopted a policy of both force and diplomacy. He repaired the forts of Tabarhinda, Sunam, and Samana, and posted a strong force in order to prevent the Mongols from crossing the river Beas. He himself remained at Delhi and never moved out on distant expeditions in order to maintain the utmost vigilance at the frontier. Simultaneously, he sent diplomatic feelers to Halaku, the Mongol Il-Khan of Iran and the neighboring areas. Envoys from Halaku reached Delhi and were received with great honor by Balban. Balban tacitly agreed to leave the major portion of the Punjab under Mongol control. The Mongols, on their part, did not make any attack on Delhi. The frontier, however, remained undefined, and Balban had to conduct almost annual expeditions against the Mongols in order to keep them in check. He was successful in wresting Multan and placed it as an independent charge under his eldest son, Prince Mahmud. It was in the effort at holding the Multan–Beas line that Prince Mahmud, the heir-apparent of Balban, was killed in an encounter.

        Although Balban died in 1286, the strategic and diplomatic arrangements made by him continued to serve the Delhi Sultanate. In 1292, Abdullah, a grandson of Halaku, advanced on Delhi with 150,000 horses. He was defeated by Jalaluddin Khalji near Balban’s frontier line of Tabarhinda, Sunam, etc. The demoralized Mongols asked for a truce, and 4,000 Mongols, who had embraced Islam, came over to the side of the Indian rulers and settled down near Delhi.

        The Mongol attempt to pass beyond the Punjab and to attack Delhi itself was due to a change in Central Asian politics. The Mongol Il-Khan of Iran had, on the whole, maintained friendly relations with the sultans of Delhi. Their rivals in the East were the Chaghatai Mongols, who ruled over Transoxiana. The ruler of Transoxiana, Dawa Khan, being unable to prevail against the Il-Khan of Iran, made an attempt to conquer India. From 1297, he mounted a series of campaigns against the forts defending Delhi. In 1299, a Mongol force of 200,000 under his son, Qutlugh Khwaja, arrived to conquer Delhi. The Mongols cut off the communications of Delhi with the neighboring areas and even entered many streets in the city. This was the first time the Mongols had launched a serious campaign to establish their rule over Delhi. Alauddin Khalji, who was ruling over Delhi, decided to face the Mongols outside Delhi. In a number of actions, the Indian armies held their own, though in one isolated action, the famous general, Zafar Khan, died. After some time, the Mongols withdrew without risking a full-scale battle. In 1303, the Mongols appeared again with a force of 120,000. Alauddin Khalji, who was campaigning in Rajputana against Chittor, rushed back and fortified himself at his new capital, Siri, near Delhi. The two armies camped facing each other for two months. During this period, the citizens of Delhi had to suffer many hardships. There were daily skirmishes. Finally, the Mongols retreated again, without having achieved anything.

        These two invasions of Delhi showed that the sultans of Delhi could match themselves against the Mongols, something which the Central or West Asian rulers had not been able to do till then. At the same time, it was a stern warning to the sultans of Delhi. Alauddin Khalji now took serious steps to raise a large, efficient army and repaired the fortresses near the Beas. He was, thus, able to repel with great slaughter the Mongol invasions which took place in the following years. In 1306, Dawa Khan, the Mongol ruler of Transoxiana, died, and his death was followed by confusion and a civil war. The Mongols now ceased to be a threat to India, until a new conqueror, Timur, unified the Mongols. Taking advantage of the confusion among the Mongols, the rulers of Delhi were able to recover Lahore and, in due course, extended their control up to the river Indus.

        It will, thus, be seen that during the entire thirteenth century, the Sultanate of Delhi had to face a serious danger from the northwest. Although the Mongols were gradually able to bring almost the entire Punjab as well as Kashmir under their control and to threaten Delhi, due to the firmness and vigor of the Turkish rulers, and their diplomacy, this threat was averted, and later the Punjab was recovered. However, the serious threat posed to the Sultanate of Delhi by the Mongols had a powerful effect on all the internal problems of the Sultanate.

    INTERNAL REBELLIONS AND THE STRUGGLE FOR THE TERRITORIAL CONSOLIDATION OF THE Delhi Sultanate
        During the rule of the Bari Turks (sometimes called the Mamluk or Slave rulers), the Sultans of Delhi had to face not only internal dissensions and foreign invasions but also internal rebellions. Some of these rebellions were led by ambitious Muslim chiefs who wanted to become independent; others were led by Rajput rajas and zamindars who were eager to expel the Turkish invaders from their territories or exploit the difficulties of the Turkish rulers to aggrandize themselves at the expense of their weaker neighbors. Thus, these rajas and zamindars not only fought against the Turks but also against each other. The nature and objectives of the various internal rebellions differed, so it is incorrect to lump them together as “Hindu resistance.” India was a large country, and due to geographical factors, it was difficult to rule the country effectively from one center. Provincial governors had to be given a large amount of autonomy, which encouraged them to repudiate the control of Delhi and declare themselves independent. Local rulers could count on regional sentiments, which had grown stronger between the seventh and twelfth centuries, to rally opposition to the rule of Delhi.

        It is not necessary to list all the rebellions against the sultans of Delhi. The eastern region of India, which included Bengal and Bihar, strove continuously to throw off the yoke of Delhi. It has been noted in an earlier chapter how the Khalji chief, Muhammad bin Bakhtiyar Khalji, succeeded in expelling the Sena king, Lakshmana Sena, from Lakhnauti. After some confusion, a person named Iwaz, who took the title of Ghiyasuddin Sultan, began to function as an independent ruler there. Taking advantage of Iltutmish’s preoccupations in the northwest, he extended his authority over Bihar and exacted tribute from the ruler of Jajnagar (Orissa), Tirhut (north Bengal), Bang (east Bengal), and Kamrup (Assam).

        When Iltutmish was free from his preoccupations, he marched against Iwaz in 1225. Iwaz submitted at first, then asserted his independence once Iltutmish had turned his back. A son of Iltutmish, who was the governor of Awadh, defeated and killed Iwaz in a battle. However, affairs continued to be confused until Iltutmish led a second expedition in 1230.

        After the death of Iltutmish, the governors of Bengal sometimes asserted their independence and sometimes submitted to Delhi according to their convenience. During this period, Bihar generally remained under the control of Lakhnauti. The governors who acted as independent rulers tried, though without much success, to bring the areas between Awadh and Bihar under their control. They also attempted to extend their rule over Radha (south Bengal), Orissa, and Kamrup (Assam). In this conflict, the rulers of Orissa and Assam more than held their own. In 1244, the ruler of Orissa badly defeated the Muslim forces near Lakhnauti. Subsequent efforts by the Muslims against Jajnagar, the capital of Orissa, also failed. This showed that the independent Muslim rulers of Lakhnauti were not strong enough to bring the neighboring Hindu areas under their control.

        With the emergence of a strong ruler in the person of Balban, Delhi was eager to reassert its control over Bihar and Bengal. A formal allegiance to Delhi was no longer enough. Tughril, who had submitted to Balban and then asserted his independence, was hunted down by Balban in 1280. Savage punishment was meted out to Tughril’s family members and followers. This campaign, which lasted three years, was the only distant campaign undertaken by Balban.

        However, Delhi could not maintain control over Bengal for long. After Balban’s death, his son, Bughra Khan, who had been appointed the governor of Bengal, preferred to rule over that part rather than stake his life for the throne of Delhi. He therefore assumed independence and set up a dynasty that ruled over Bengal for the next forty years.

        Thus, Bengal and Bihar remained outside the control of Delhi during the greater part of the thirteenth century. The bulk of the Punjab had also passed under the control of the Mongols. The Turkish rule was not fully secure even in the Ganga Doab. The Katehar Rajputs, who had their capital at Ahichchatra across the Ganga, were a force to be reckoned with. They frequently raided the district of Badaun. Finally, after his accession, Balban led a large force which resorted to large-scale massacres and wholesale plunder. The district was almost depopulated, jungles were cleared, and roads were built. Barani records that from that date the iqtas of Baran, Amroha, Sambhal, and Katehar (in modern western U.P.) were rendered safe and permanently freed from any trouble.

        The southern and western frontier of the Delhi Sultanate was also not fully secure. The problem here was two-fold. Under Aibak, the Turks had captured the chain of forts—Tijara (Alwar), Bayana, Gwalior, Kalinjar, etc. They had overrun parts of eastern Rajasthan extending up to Ranthambhor, Nagaur, Ajmer, and Nadol near Jalor. Most of these areas had once belonged to the Chauhan empire and were still being ruled by Chauhan families. Aibak’s operations against them were thus a part of the campaign against the Chauhan empire. However, in the subsequent period, far from advancing into Malwa and Gujarat, the Turks were hard-pressed to defend their gains in eastern Rajasthan and even to maintain their hold on the redoubts defending Delhi and the Gangetic region.

        Taking advantage of Iltutmish’s preoccupations with the northwest, the Rajput rajas had recovered Kalinjar, Gwalior, and Bayana. Many other principalities, including Ranthambhor and Jalor, repudiated Turkish suzerainty. From 1226, Iltutmish commenced operations to recover his control over these areas. He first invested Ranthambhor and compelled the ruler to accept Turkish suzerainty. He also captured Jalor, which was on the route to Gujarat. However, Iltutmish’s efforts to extend his control over Gujarat and Malwa failed. The Chalukyas of Gujarat repulsed an attack by Iltutmish, and the Paramaras of Malwa were also too strong for the Turks. Iltutmish, however, made a raid into Malwa and plundered Ujjain and Raisina. One of his generals also raided Bundi. In the east, Iltutmish recovered Bayana and Gwalior but was unable to make much headway against the Rajputs of Baghelkhand.

        The Turkish control over eastern Rajputana was again shaken in the confusion following Iltutmish’s death. Many Rajput rulers threw off Turkish suzerainty. The fort of Gwalior was also recovered by them. The Bhatti Rajputs, entrenched in the area of Mewat, isolated Bayana and extended their depredations up to the outskirts of Delhi.

        Balban’s attempt to conquer Ranthambhor and recover Gwalior failed. However, he subdued Mewat ruthlessly so that Delhi remained secure from Mewati inroads for almost one hundred years. Ajmer and Nagaur continued to remain under the firm control of the Delhi Sultanate. Balban, thus, consolidated the Turkish rule in eastern Rajasthan despite his other preoccupations. The continuous fighting among the Rajput rulers also aided the Turks and made impossible any effective combination of the Rajputs against them.

        The establishment of a strong monarchy, the repelling of the Mongol invaders, and the consolidation of the territory of the Delhi Sultanate in the Ganga Doab and control over eastern Rajasthan paved the way for the next step in the history of the Delhi Sultanate, i.e., its expansion into western India and the Deccan.


- The Delhi Sultanate—II (Circa 1200-1400) The Khaljis and the Tughlaqs
    After the death of Balban in 1286, there was confusion in Delhi for some time. Balban’s chosen successor, Prince Mahmud, had died earlier in a battle with the Mongols. A second son, Bughra Khan, preferred to rule over Bengal and Bihar, although he was invited by the nobles in Delhi to assume the throne. Hence, a grandson of Baibars was installed in Delhi. However, he was too young and inexperienced to cope with the situation. There had been considerable resentment and opposition to the attempt of the Turkish nobles to monopolize high offices. Many non-Turks, such as the Khaljis, had come to India during the Ghurid invasion. They had never received sufficient recognition in Delhi and had to move to Bengal and Bihar for opportunities for advancement. They had also found employment as soldiers, many of them being posted in the northwest to meet the Mongol challenge. Over time, many Indian Muslims were admitted to the nobility, and they too were dissatisfied at being denied high offices, as may be inferred from the manner in which Imaduddin Raihan was put up against Balban. Balban’s own example of setting aside the sons of Nasiruddin Mahmud demonstrated that a successful general could ascend the throne by ousting the scions of an established dynasty, provided he had sufficient support in the nobility and the army.

    The Khaljis (1290-1320)
        For these reasons, a group of Khalji nobles, led by Jalaluddin Khalji, who had been the warden of the marches in the northwest and had fought many successful engagements against the Mongols, overthrew the incompetent successors of Balban in 1290. The Khalji rebellion was welcomed by the non-Turkish sections in the nobility. The Khaljis, who were of mixed Turkish-Afghan origin, did not exclude the Turks from high offices, but the rise of the Khaljis to power ended the Turkish monopoly of high offices.

        Jalaluddin Khalji ruled for only a brief period of six years. He tried to mitigate some of the harsh aspects of Balban’s rule. He was the first ruler of the Delhi Sultanate to clearly put forward the view that the state should be based on the willing support of the governed, and that since the majority of the people in India were Hindus, the state in India could not be a truly Islamic state. He also tried to gain the goodwill of the nobility by a policy of tolerance and avoiding harsh punishments. However, many people, including his supporters, considered this to be a weak policy, unsuitable for the times. The Delhi Sultanate faced numerous internal and external foes, and for this reason, there was a sense of insecurity. Jalaluddin’s policy was reversed by Alauddin, who awarded drastic punishments to all those who dared to oppose him.

        Alauddin Khalji (1296-1316) came to the throne by treacherously murdering his uncle and father-in-law, Jalaluddin Khalji. As the governor of Awadh, Alauddin had accumulated a vast treasure by invading Deogiri in the Deccan. Jalaluddin had gone to visit his nephew at Kara in the hope of getting hold of this treasure. He had left most of his army behind and crossed the river Ganges with only a few followers so that his nephew might not take fright and run away. After murdering his uncle, Alauddin won over most of the nobles and soldiers to his side by lavishly distributing gold. But for some time, Alauddin had to face a series of rebellions—some by disgruntled nobles and some by Alauddin’s own relations. To overawe his opponents, Alauddin Khalji adopted methods of utmost severity and ruthlessness. Most of the nobles who had defected to him by the lure of gold were either killed or dismissed, and their properties confiscated. Severe punishments were meted out to the rebellious members of his own family. He resorted to a wholesale massacre of the Mongols, a couple of thousand of whom had settled down in Delhi after embracing Islam during Jalaluddin’s reign. These new converts had rebelled, demanding a larger share in the loot from Gujarat, having campaigned there. Alauddin gave harsh punishments even to the wives and children of these rebels, a practice which, according to the historian Barani, was a new one and was continued by his successors. Alauddin framed a series of regulations to prevent the nobles from conspiring against him. They were forbidden to hold banquets or festivities, or to form marriage alliances without the permission of the sultan. To discourage festive parties, he banned the use of wines and intoxicants. He also instituted a spy service to inform the sultan of all that the nobles said and did.

        By these harsh methods, Alauddin Khalji cowed down the nobles and made them completely subservient to the crown. No further rebellions took place during his lifetime. But in the long run, his methods proved harmful to the dynasty. The old nobility was destroyed, and the new nobility was taught to accept anyone who could ascend the throne of Delhi. This became apparent after Alauddin Khalji’s death in 1316. His favorite, Malik Kafur, raised a minor son of Alauddin to the throne and imprisoned or blinded his other sons without encountering any opposition from the nobles. Soon after this, Kafur was killed by the palace guards, and a Hindu convert, Khusrau, ascended the throne. Although the historians of the time accused Khusrau of violating Islam and committing all types of crimes, the fact is that Khusrau was no worse than any of the preceding monarchs. Nor was any open resentment voiced against him by the Muslim nobles or by the population of Delhi. Even Nizamuddin Auliya, the famous Sufi saint of Delhi, acknowledged Khusrau by accepting his gifts. This had a positive aspect too. It showed that the Muslims of Delhi and the neighboring areas were no longer swayed by racist considerations and were prepared to obey anyone, irrespective of his family or racial background. This helped in broadening the social base of the nobility still further. However, in 1320, a group of officers led by Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq raised the banner of revolt. They broke out into open rebellion, and in a hard-fought battle outside the capital, Khusrau was defeated and killed.

    The Tughlaqs (1320-1412)
        Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq established a new dynasty that ruled until 1412. The Tughlaqs produced three competent rulers: Ghiyasuddin, his son Muhammad bin Tughlaq (1324-1351), and his nephew Firuz Shah Tughlaq (1351-1388). The first two of these sultans ruled over an empire that encompassed almost the entire country. Firuz’s empire was smaller, but even then, it was almost as large as that ruled by Alauddin Khalji. After Firuz’s death, the Delhi Sultanate disintegrated, and North India was divided into several small states. Although the Tughlaqs continued to rule until 1412, the invasion of Delhi by Timur in 1398 can be seen as marking the end of the Tughlaq empire.

        We will first examine the remarkable expansion of the Delhi Sultanate from the time of Alauddin Khalji, followed by the various internal reforms during this period, and the factors that led to the disintegration of the Sultanate.

    I. Expansion of the Delhi Sultanate
        We have seen how eastern Rajasthan, including Ajmer and some neighboring territories, came under the control of the Delhi Sultanate. However, from the time of Balban, Ranthambhor, the most powerful Rajput state, had gone out of its control. Jalaluddin had undertaken an invasion of Ranthambhor but found the task too difficult. As a result, southern and western Rajasthan remained outside the Sultanate’s control. With the rise of Alauddin Khalji, a new situation emerged. Within a span of twenty-five years, the armies of the Delhi Sultanate not only brought Gujarat and Malwa under their control, subduing most of the princes in Rajasthan, but they also overran the Deccan and South India up to Madurai. In due course, an attempt was made to bring this vast area under the direct administrative control of Delhi. The new phase of expansion was initiated by Alauddin Khalji and continued under his successors, reaching its climax during the reign of Muhammad bin Tughlaq.

        We have already seen how the Delhi Sultanate was gradually prepared for this renewed phase of expansion. At this time, Malwa, Gujarat, and Deogir were ruled by Rajput dynasties, most of which had emerged towards the end of the twelfth and the beginning of the thirteenth century. Despite the establishment of Turkish rule in the Ganga Valley, these dynasties had hardly altered their old ways. Moreover, each of them was contending for supremacy over the entire region. For instance, when the Turks attacked Gujarat under Heutmish, the rulers of both Malwa and Deogir attacked from the south. In the Maratha region, the rulers of Deogir were constantly at war with Warangal in the Telangana region and with the Hoysalas in Karnataka. The Hoysalas, in turn, were at war with their neighbors, the Pandyas in Mabar (Tamil region). These rivalries not only made the conquest of Malwa and Gujarat easier but also drew invaders further into the south.

        The Turkish rulers had strong reasons for coveting Malwa and Gujarat. Not only were these areas fertile and populous, but they also controlled the western sea ports and the trade routes connecting them with the Ganga Valley. The overseas trade from Gujarat’s ports brought in a lot of gold and silver, which had been accumulated by the region’s rulers. Another reason for the Sultans of Delhi to establish control over Gujarat was that it could ensure a better supply of horses to their armies. With the rise of the Mongols in Central and West Asia and their struggle with the rulers of Delhi, the supply of quality horses from this region had been beset with difficulties. The import of Arabian, Iraqi, and Turkish horses to India from the western sea ports had been an important item of trade since the eighth century.

        In early 1299, an army under two of Alauddin Khalji’s noted generals marched against Gujarat via Rajasthan. On their way, they raided and captured Jaisalmer as well. The Gujarat ruler, Rai Karan, was taken by surprise and fled without offering a fight. The chief cities of Gujarat, including Anhilwara, where many beautiful buildings and temples had been constructed over generations, were sacked. The famous temple of Somnath, which had been rebuilt in the twelfth century, was also plundered. An enormous booty was collected. The wealthy Muslim merchants of Cambay were not spared either. It was here that Malik Kafur, who later led invasions into South India, was captured. He was presented to Alauddin and quickly rose in his esteem.

        Gujarat now passed under the control of Delhi. The speed and ease with which Gujarat was conquered suggest that the Gujarat ruler was not popular among his subjects. It seems that one of his ministers, who had fallen out with him, approached Alauddin to invade Gujarat and assisted him. The Gujarat army may not have been well-trained, and the administration was likely lax. With the help of Ramachandra, the ruler of Deogir, the ousted ruler Rai Karan managed to hold on to a portion of southern Gujarat. As we shall see, this provided an additional cause of war between Delhi and the Yadavas of Deogir.

    Rajasthan
        After the conquest of Gujarat, Alauddin turned his attention to consolidating his rule over Rajasthan. The first target was Ranthambhor, ruled by the Chauhan successors of Prithviraj. Its ruler, Hamirdeva, had embarked on a series of military expeditions against his neighbors. He is credited with victories against Raja Bhoj of Dhar and the Rana of Mewar. However, these victories led to his undoing. After the Gujarat campaign, while returning to Delhi, the Mongol soldiers rebelled due to a dispute over the share of the booty. The rebellion was crushed, and a wholesale massacre followed. Two Mongol nobles fled to Ranthambhor for refuge. Alauddin sent messages to Hamirdeva, ordering him to kill or expel the Mongol nobles. But Hamirdeva, with a strong sense of dignity and obligation to those seeking refuge, and confident in the strength of his fort and army, sent haughty replies. He was not wrong in his assessment, as Ranthambhor was reputed to be the strongest fort in Rajasthan and had previously defied Jalaluddin Khalji. Alauddin dispatched an army commanded by one of his generals, but it was repulsed by Hamirdeva. Finally, Alauddin himself had to march against Ranthambhor. The famous poet Amir Khusrau, who accompanied Alauddin, gave a graphic description of the fort and its siege. After three months of siege, the infamous ‘jashar’ ceremony took place: the women mounted the funeral pyre, and the men fought to the last. This is the first Persian account of the ‘jashar’. Both the Mongols and the Rajputs died fighting. This event took place in 1301.

        Next, Alauddin turned his attention to Chittor, which, after Ranthambhor, was the most powerful state in Rajasthan. Its ruler, Ratan Singh, had annoyed Alauddin by refusing to allow his armies to march to Gujarat through Mewar territories. Chittor also dominated the route from Ajmer to Malwa. There is a popular legend that Alauddin attacked Chittor because he coveted Padmini, the beautiful queen of Ratan Singh. However, many modern historians dismiss this legend as it is first mentioned more than a hundred years later and was later embellished by the poet Malik Muhammad Jaisi. In this story, Padmini is said to be the princess of Singhaldvipa, and Ratan Singh crosses the seven seas to bring her back to Chittor after many improbable adventures. The Padmini legend is part of this account. The idea that the Sultan could have demanded to see the face of a queen who was another ruler’s wife is also unthinkable, just as the idea that Ratan Singh would have allowed it, even through a mirror, would have been an insult to Rajput honor.

        Alauddin closely invested Chittor. After months of valiant resistance by the besieged, Alauddin stormed the fort in 1303. The Rajputs performed the jashar, and most of the warriors died fighting. Padmini and the other queens also sacrificed their lives. It seems that Ratan Singh was captured alive and kept prisoner for some time. Chittor was assigned to Alauddin’s minor son, Khizr Khan, and a Muslim garrison was stationed in the fort. Eventually, the charge of the fort was handed over to a cousin of Ratan Singh.

        Alauddin also overran Jalor, which lay on the route to Gujarat. Almost all the major states in Rajasthan were forced to submit. However, it seems that Alauddin did not attempt to establish direct administration over the Rajput states. The Rajput rulers were allowed to rule but had to pay regular tribute and obey the Sultan’s orders. Muslim garrisons were posted in some important towns, such as Ajmer, Nagaur, etc. Thus, Rajasthan was thoroughly subdued.

    Deccan and South India
        Even before completing the subjugation of Rajasthan, Alauddin had conquered Malwa, which, according to Amir Khusrau, was so vast that even wise geographers were unable to delimit its frontiers. Unlike Rajasthan, Malwa was brought under direct administration, and a governor was appointed to oversee it.

        In 1306-07, Alauddin planned two campaigns. The first was against Rai Karan, who, after his expulsion from Gujarat, had been holding Baglana on the border of Malwa. Rai Karan fought bravely, but he could not resist for long. The second expedition was aimed at Rai Ramachandra, the ruler of Deogir, who had been in alliance with Rai Karan. In an earlier campaign, Rai Ramachandra had agreed to pay a yearly tribute to Delhi, but this had fallen into arrears. The command of the second army was entrusted to Alauddin’s slave, Malik Kafur. Rai Ramachandra, who surrendered to Kafur, was honorably treated and taken to Delhi. After some time, he was restored to his dominions with the title of Rai Rayan. A gift of one lakh tankas was given to him along with a golden-colored canopy, symbolizing rulership. He was also given a district in Gujarat, and one of his daughters was married to Alauddin. The alliance with Rai Ramachandra was to prove valuable to Alauddin in his further expansion into the Deccan.

        Between 1309 and 1311, Malik Kafur led two campaigns in South India—the first against Warangal in the Telangana region, and the second against Dwar Samudra (modern Karnataka), Mabar, and Madurai (Tamil Nadu). A great deal has been written about these expeditions, partly because they captured the imagination of contemporaries. The court poet, Amir Khusrau, made them the subject of a book. These campaigns reflected boldness, self-confidence, and a high spirit of adventure on the part of the Delhi rulers. For the first time, Muslim armies penetrated as far south as Madurai and brought back immense wealth. They provided firsthand information about conditions in the south, though they hardly provided any new geographical knowledge. The trade routes to South India were well known, and when Kafur’s armies reached Virachala in Mabar, they found a colony of Muslim merchants settled there. The ruler even had a contingent of Muslim troops in his army. These expeditions greatly raised Kafur in public estimation, and Alauddin appointed him mulk-nai or vice-regent of the empire. Politically, however, the effects of these campaigns were limited. Kafur was able to force the rulers of Warangal and Dwar Samudra to sue for peace, surrender their treasures and elephants, and promise an annual tribute. However, it was well known that securing these tributes would require annual campaigns. In the case of Mabar, even this formal agreement was not reached. The rulers there avoided a pitched battle. Kafur plundered as much as he could, including a number of wealthy temples, such as those at Chidambaram. However, he had to return to Delhi without being able to defeat the Tamil armies.

        Despite the troubles following Alauddin’s death, within a decade and a half, all the southern kingdoms mentioned above were wiped out, and their territories were brought under the direct administration of Delhi. Alauddin himself was not in favor of direct administration of the southern states. However, the change in policy had begun in his lifetime. In 1315, Rai Ramachandra, who had remained loyally allied with Delhi, died, and his sons threw off the yoke of Delhi. Malik Kafur quickly crushed the rebellion and assumed direct administration of the area. However, many outlying areas declared their independence, and a few remained under the control of Rai Ramachandra’s descendants.

        Upon succeeding to the throne, Mubarak Shah, a successor of Alauddin, subdued Deogir again and installed a Muslim governor there. He also raided Warangal, forcing the ruler to cede one of his districts and pay an annual tribute of forty gold bricks. Khusrau Khan, a slave of the sultan, made a plundering raid into Mabar and sacked the rich city of Masulipatnam. No further conquests were made in the area.

        Following the accession of Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq in 1320, a sustained and vigorous forward policy was pursued. The sultan’s son, Muhammad bin Tughlaq, was posted to Deogir for the purpose. On the pretext that the ruler of Warangal had not paid the stipulated tribute, Muhammad bin Tughlaq besieged Warangal again. Initially, he suffered a reverse. Upon hearing a rumor of the sultan’s death in Delhi, the Delhi armies were disorganized, and the defenders inflicted heavy losses. Muhammad bin Tughlaq had to retreat to Deogir. After reorganizing his forces, he attacked again, and this time no quarter was given to the Rai. This was followed by the conquest of Mabar, which was also annexed. Muhammad bin Tughlaq then raided Orissa and returned to Delhi with rich plunder. The next year, he subdued Bengal, which had been independent since the death of Balban.

        Thus, by 1324, the territories of the Delhi Sultanate extended as far south as Madurai. The last Hindu principality in the area, Kampili in South Karnataka, was annexed in 1328. A cousin of Muhammad bin Tughlaq, who had rebelled, had been given shelter there, providing a convenient excuse for attacking it.

        The sudden expansion of the Delhi Sultanate to the far south and east, including Orissa, created tremendous administrative and financial challenges for Muhammad bin Tughlaq. We will now examine the manner in which he tried to address these problems, and the strains it imposed on the Sultanate itself.

    Internal Reforms and Experiments
        By the time Alauddin Khalji came to the throne, the position of the Delhi Sultanate was fairly well consolidated in the central portion of the empire, i.e., the region comprising the upper Ganga valley and eastern Rajasthan. This emboldened the sultans to undertake a series of internal reforms and experiments aimed at improving administration, strengthening the army, boosting the machinery of land revenue administration, expanding and improving cultivation, and providing for the welfare of citizens in the rapidly growing towns. Not all the measures were successful, but they marked important new departures. Some of the experiments failed due to lack of experience, poor planning, or opposition from vested interests. However, they showed that the Turkish state had acquired a measure of stability and was no longer solely focused on warfare and law and order.

        Market Control and Agrarian Policy of Alauddin

        For contemporaries, Alauddin’s measures to control the markets were considered one of the great wonders of the world. In a series of orders after his return from the Chittor campaign, Alauddin sought to fix the prices of all commodities—from foodgrains, sugar, and cooking oil to a needle, and from costly imported cloth to horses, cattle, and slave boys and girls. For this purpose, he set up three markets in Delhi: one for foodgrains, another for costly cloth, and a third for horses, slaves, and cattle. Each market was overseen by a high officer called a stahna, who maintained a register of merchants and strictly controlled the shopkeepers and prices. Regulation of prices, especially foodgrains, was a constant concern for medieval rulers because without the supply of cheap foodgrains to the towns, they could not expect the support of the citizens or the army stationed there.

        But Alauddin had additional reasons for controlling the market. The Mongol invasions of Delhi had highlighted the need to raise a large army to defend the region. However, such an army would soon exhaust his treasury unless he could lower prices and consequently reduce salaries. To achieve this, Alauddin took thorough measures. He declared that the land revenue in the Doab region (extending from Meerut near the Yamuna to the border of Kara near Allahabad) would be paid directly to the state, meaning that villages in the area would not be assigned in igta to anyone. Moreover, the land revenue was raised to half of the produce. This was a heavy charge, and Alauddin implemented a number of measures to manage the situation. By increasing the state’s demand and requiring peasants to pay in cash, the peasants were forced to sell their foodgrains at low prices to the banjaras, who carried them to the towns and sold them at prices fixed by the state. To prevent hoarding, all the banjaras were registered, and their agents and families were held collectively responsible for violations. Additionally, the state set up warehouses to store foodgrains, which were released whenever there was a famine or a shortfall in supply. Alauddin kept himself well-informed and imposed harsh punishments if any shopkeeper charged a higher price or used false weights and measures. Barani tells us that prices were not allowed to increase even by a dam or paisa during famine. For example, wheat was sold at 7½ jitals per man, barley at 4 jitals, and good quality rice at 5 jitals. Barani says: “The permanence of prices in the grain market was a wonder of the age.”

        Control of horse prices was also important for the sultan because maintaining a well-equipped army depended on the supply of good horses at reasonable prices. The position of the horse supply had improved due to the conquest of Gujarat. Good-quality horses could be sold only to the state. Alauddin fixed the price of a first-grade horse at 100 to 120 sankas, while a tata (pony) unsuitable for the army cost 10 to 25 tankas. The prices of cattle and slaves were also strictly regulated, and Barani provides their prices in detail, showing that slavery was considered a normal feature in medieval India. While the prices of other goods, especially costly cloth, perfumes, etc., were also fixed, this was not vital for the sultan. It was likely done either to prevent high prices from affecting general prices or to please the nobility. Large sums of money were advanced to Multani traders to bring fine quality cloth to Delhi, making it the largest market for such cloth.

        The realization of land revenue in cash allowed Alauddin to pay his soldiers in cash, the first sultan in the Sultanate to do so. A sawar (cavalryman) in his time was paid 238 sankas a year, about 20 tankas a month. This salary was expected to cover his own expenses, as well as those of his horse and equipment. Even then, this was not a low salary, considering that during Akbar’s reign, when prices were much higher, a Mughal cavalryman received a salary of around 20 rupees a month.

        Barani believed that one of Alauddin’s main objectives in controlling the markets was to punish Hindus, since most traders were Hindu and engaged in profiteering. However, trade to Central Asia was largely in the hands of Muslims, such as Khurasanis and Multanis, which also benefited from these regulations, something Barani does not mention.

        It is unclear whether Alauddin’s market regulations were applied only to Delhi or also to other towns in the empire. Barani suggests that regulations in Delhi tended to be followed elsewhere. In any case, the army was stationed in other towns as well, and the cheap prices benefited all citizens, regardless of their religious beliefs.

    Agrarian Reforms
        Apart from the control of the market, Alauddin took important steps in the field of land revenue administration. He was the first monarch in the Sultanate who insisted that in the Doab, land revenue would be assessed on the basis of measuring the land under cultivation. This implied that the rich and powerful in the villages, who had more land, could not pass on their burden to the poor. Alauddin wanted that the landlords of the area—called pahuts and mugaddams—should pay the same taxes as others. Thus, they had to pay taxes on milch cattle and houses like the others, and forgo other illegal cesses they were in the habit of realizing. In the picturesque language of Barani, “The pahuts and mugaddams could not afford to ride on rich caparisoned horses or to chew betel leaves, and they became so poor that their wives had to go and work in the houses of Muslims.”

        The policy of direct collection of land revenue by the state, based on measurement, could only succeed if the amis and other local officials were honest. Although Alauddin had given these elements sufficient salaries to enable them to live in comfort, he insisted that their accounts should be audited strictly. We are told that for small defaults, they would be beaten and sent to prison. Barani says that their lives had become so insecure that no one was willing to marry their daughters to them! No doubt, this is an exaggeration because, then as now, government service was considered prestigious, and those who held government offices, whether they were Hindus or Muslims, were eagerly sought as marriage partners.

        Although Barani writes as if all the measures mentioned above were directed solely against the Hindus, it is clear that they were, in the main, directed against the privileged sections in the countryside. But these can hardly be considered as socialistic measures. They were basically designed to meet an emergency situation, namely, the danger posed by the Mongols. Perhaps, it would have been better for Alauddin to have controlled only the price of essential commodities, such as food grains, etc. But, as the contemporary writer Barani says, he tried to control the price of everything, from ‘caps to socks, from combs to needles, vegetables, soups, sweetmeats to chapatis.’ These led to vexatious laws which were sought to be violated and led to drastic punishments and resentment. Alauddin’s agrarian policy was certainly harsh and must have affected the ordinary cultivators also. But it was not so burdensome as to drive them into rebellion or flight.

        The market regulations of Alauddin came to an end with his death, but they did achieve a number of gains. We are told by Barani that the regulations enabled Alauddin to raise a large and efficient cavalry, which enabled him to defeat the subsequent Mongol onslaughts with great slaughter and drive them beyond the Indus. The land revenue reforms of Alauddin marked an important step towards closer relationships with the rural areas. Some of his measures were continued by his successors and later provided a basis for the agrarian reforms of Sher Shah and Akbar.

    Muhammad Tughlaq’s Experiments
        Next to Alauddin Khalji, Muhammad bin Tughlaq (1324-51) is best remembered as a ruler who undertook a number of bold experiments and showed a keen interest in agriculture.

        In some ways, Muhammad bin Tughlaq was one of the most remarkable rulers of his age. He was deeply read in religion and philosophy, and had a critical and open mind. He conversed not only with Muslim mystics but also with Hindu yogis and Jain saints such as Jinaprabha Suri. This was not liked by many orthodox theologians who accused him of being a ‘rationalist,’ that is, one who was not prepared to accept religious beliefs as a matter of faith. He was also prepared to give high offices to people on the basis of merit, irrespective of whether they belonged to noble families or not. Unfortunately, he was inclined to be hasty and impatient. That is why many of his experiments failed, and he has been dubbed an ‘ill-starred idealist.’

        Muhammad Tughlaq’s reign started under inauspicious circumstances. Sultan Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq was returning to Delhi after a successful campaign against Bengal. A wooden pavilion was erected hastily at the orders of Muhammad Tughlaq to give a fitting reception to the sultan. When the captured elephants were being paraded, the hastily erected structure collapsed, and the Sultan was killed. This led to a number of rumors—that Muhammad Tughlaq had planned to kill his father, that this was a curse of the heavens, and of the famous saint of Delhi, Shaikh Nizamuddin Auliya, whom the ruler had threatened to punish, etc.

        The most controversial step Muhammad Tughlaq undertook soon after his accession was the so-called transfer of the capital from Delhi to Deogir. As we have seen, Deogir had been a base for the expansion of Turkish rule in South India. Muhammad Tughlaq himself had spent a number of years there as a prince. The attempt to bring the entire South India under the direct control of Delhi had led to serious political difficulties. The people of the area were restive under what they felt was alien rule. A number of Muslim nobles had tried to take advantage of this situation to proclaim their independence there. The most serious rebellion was that of a cousin of Muhammad Tughlaq, Gurshasp, against whom the sultan had to proceed personally. It appears that the sultan wanted to make Deogir a second capital so that he might be able to control South India better. For this purpose, he ordered many of the officers, their followers, and leading men, including many Sufi saints, to shift to Deogir, which was renamed Daulatabad. It seems that a good deal of official pressure was exerted on these sections to migrate. Liberal grants were also provided to them, and arrangements made for their stay at Daulatabad. No attempt was made to shift the rest of the population. Delhi remained a large and populous city in the absence of the sultan. Coins minted in Delhi while the sultan was at Deogir testify to this. Though Muhammad Tughlaq had built a road from Delhi to Daulatabad and set up rest houses on the way to help the travelers, Daulatabad was more than 1500 km away. Many people died due to the rigors of the journey and the heat, since this movement took place during the summer season. Many of those who reached Daulatabad felt homesick, for some of them had lived for several generations in Delhi and looked upon it as their home. Hence, there was a good deal of discontent. After a couple of years, Muhammad Tughlaq decided to abandon Daulatabad, largely because he soon found that just as he could not control the south from Delhi, he could not control North India from Daulatabad.

        Though the attempt to make Deogir a second capital failed, the exodus did have a number of long-range benefits. It helped in bringing North and South India closer together by improving communications. Many people, including religious divines who had gone to Daulatabad, settled down there. They became the means of spreading in the Deccan the cultural, religious, and social ideas which the Turks had brought with them to North India. This resulted in a new process of cultural interaction between North and South India, as well as within South India itself.

        Another step Muhammad Tughlaq took at this time was the introduction of ‘token currency.’ Since money is merely a medium of exchange, all countries in the world today have token currencies—generally paper currency—so that they do not have to depend upon the supply of gold and silver. There was a shortage of silver in the world in the fourteenth century. Moreover, Qublai Khan of China had already successfully experimented with a token currency. A Mongol ruler of Iran, Ghazan Khan, had also experimented with it. Muhammad Tughlaq decided to introduce a bronze coin which was to have the same value as the silver zanka. Specimens of this coin have been found in different parts of India and can be seen in museums. The idea of token currency was a new one in India, and it was difficult to induce the traders, as well as the common man, to accept it. Muhammad Tughlaq might still have been successful if the government had been able to prevent people from forging the new coins. The government was not able to do so, and soon the new coins began to be greatly devalued in the markets. Finally, Muhammad Tughlaq decided to withdraw the token currency. He promised to exchange silver pieces for bronze coins. In this way, many people exchanged the new coins. But the forged coins, which could be found out through tests, were not exchanged. These coins were heaped up outside the fort, and Barani says they remained lying there for many years.

        The failure of these two experiments affected the prestige of the sovereign and also meant wastage of money. However, the government quickly recovered. The Moroccan traveler, Ibn Battuta, who came to Delhi in 1333, could not see any harmful after-effects of these experiments. A far more serious problem Muhammad bin Tughlaq had to contend with was the security of the frontiers. Administration, especially revenue administration, and his relations with the nobles also presented some serious problems.

        We have seen in an earlier section the serious problems posed to the Delhi Sultanate by the steady expansion of the Mongol power into the Punjab and their assaults on Delhi. Although the Mongols had by then become weak due to their internal dissensions, they were still strong enough to threaten the Punjab and the areas near Delhi. In the early years of Muhammad Tughlaq’s reign, the Mongols, under their leader Tarmashrin, burst into Sind, and a force reached up to Meerut, about 65 km from Delhi. Muhammad Tughlaq not only defeated the Mongols in a battle near the Jhelum, but also occupied Kalanaur and for some time his power extended beyond the Indus up to Peshawar. This showed that the Sultan of Delhi was now in a position to go on the offensive against the Mongols. After coming back from Deogir, the Sultan recruited a large army in order to occupy Ghazni and Afghanistan. Barani says that his object was to occupy Khurasan and Iraq. We have no means of finding out the true objective of Muhammad Tughlaq. Maybe his objective was to reestablish what has been called the ‘scientific frontier,’ i.e., the line formed by the Hindukush and Qandahar. Many of the princes and others who had fled from Central Asia and taken shelter at the court of Muhammad Tughlaq may have thought that it was a good opportunity to oust the Mongols from the area. After a year, following the failure of the experiment of establishing a token currency and the improvement of relations with the Mongols, the army was disbanded. Meanwhile, the situation in Central Asia changed rapidly. In due course, Timur united the entire area under his control and posed a fresh threat to India.

        The effects of the Khurasan project should not be exaggerated or confused with the Qarachil expedition. This expedition was launched in the Kumaon Hills in the Himalayas. However, according to a modern historian, the expedition was aimed at Kashmir in order to control the entry of horses from the Chinese side, i.e., Sinkiang. However, it never aimed at the conquest of China, as some later historians have suggested. After some success, the armies went too far into the inhospitable region of the Himalayas and suffered a disaster. We are told that out of an army of 10,000, only 10 persons returned. However, it seems that the hill rajas accepted the overlordship of Delhi. Subsequently, Muhammad Tughlaq undertook an expedition in the Kangra hills also. Thus, the hill regions were fully secured.

    Agrarian Reforms and Nobility
        Muhammad Tughlaq undertook several measures to improve agriculture, most of which were tried in the Doab region. Unlike Alauddin Khalji, who aimed to reduce the Afés and wrtigaddams (headmen in the villages) to the status of ordinary cultivators, Muhammad Tughlaq wanted to ensure an adequate share of land revenue for the state. His measures had a long-term impact, though they failed disastrously during his reign. It is difficult to determine whether these measures failed due to bad planning or faulty implementation by officials who lacked experience.

        At the start of Muhammad Tughlaq’s reign, a serious peasant rebellion broke out in the Gangetic Doab. Peasants fled the villages, prompting harsh measures from the Sultan to capture and punish them. Historians believe the trouble stemmed from over-assessment. Although the state’s share remained half, as it had in Alauddin’s time, it was fixed arbitrarily, not based on actual produce. Additionally, prices were artificially fixed to convert the produce into money. A severe famine, which ravaged the area for six years, worsened the situation. Efforts for relief, such as advances for cattle, seeds, and digging wells, came too late. So many people died in Delhi that the air became pestilential. The Sultan left Delhi and lived for two and a half years in a camp called Swargadwari, 100 miles from Delhi, on the banks of the Ganges near Kanauj.

        After returning to Delhi, Muhammad Tughlaq launched a scheme to extend and improve cultivation in the Doab. He set up a separate department called Diwan-i-Amir-i-Kohi. The area was divided into development blocks, each headed by an official tasked with extending cultivation by providing loans to cultivators and encouraging them to grow superior crops—such as wheat instead of barley, sugarcane instead of wheat, and grapes and dates instead of sugarcane. However, the scheme failed largely because the officials chosen for the purpose were inexperienced and dishonest, misappropriating the funds. The large sums of money advanced for the project could not be recovered. Fortunately, Muhammad Tughlaq died before the situation worsened, and Firuz Tughlaq wrote off the loans. Despite the failure, Muhammad Tughlaq’s policy for extending and improving cultivation was not abandoned; it was later adopted by Firuz and, more vigorously, by Akbar.

        Another problem Muhammad Tughlaq faced was the issue of the nobility. After the downfall of the Chahalgani Turks and the rise of the Khaljis, the nobility comprised Muslims from various races, including Indian converts. Muhammad Tughlaq took this a step further by entertaining people from non-noble backgrounds, including those from castes like barbers, cooks, weavers, and wine-makers, even giving them important offices. Many of these individuals were descendants of Muslim converts, though a few Hindus were also included. While there is no evidence to suggest that these people were uneducated or inefficient in their roles, the old noble families resented their rise. The historian Barani highlighted this in his criticism of Muhammad Tughlaq.

        Muhammad Tughlaq also welcomed foreigners into the nobility, a large number of whom came to his court. As a result, the nobility became divided into many divergent sections. This lack of cohesion led to a lack of loyalty to the Sultan. The vastness of the empire provided opportunities for rebellion and for nobles to carve out independent spheres of authority. The Sultan’s hasty and impulsive temperament, along with his tendency to punish suspected disloyalty severely, further exacerbated these trends.

        Thus, Muhammad Tughlaq’s reign, while marking the zenith of the Delhi Sultanate, also saw the beginning of its disintegration.

    Decline and Disintegration of the Delhi Sultanate: Firuz and His Successors
        During the latter half of Muhammad Tughlaq’s reign, repeated rebellions occurred across the empire. Rebellions by ambitious nobles in the outlying areas were common, but in most cases, the sultans were able to suppress them with the help of the central army and loyal nobles. Muhammad Tughlaq faced several difficulties, as rebellions took place one after another in different parts of the empire—in Bengal, Mabar (Tamil Nadu), Warangal, Kampili (Karnataka), West Bengal, Awadh, Gujarat, and Sindh. Muhammad Tughlaq did not trust anyone fully, so he moved from one part of the country to another to suppress these rebellions, which exhausted his armies. The rebellions in South India were the most serious. Initially, local governors organized the rebellions. The Sultan hurried to South India, but soon after, a plague broke out in the army, killing two-thirds of it. This was a blow from which Muhammad Tughlaq never recovered. After his return from South India, another rebellion broke out, led by two brothers, Harihara and Bukka. They established a principality that later became the Vijayanagara empire, which expanded throughout South India. In the Deccan, some foreign nobles established a principality near Daulatabad, which grew into the Bahmani empire. Bengal also became independent. Despite his efforts, Muhammad Tughlaq was able to quell rebellions in Awadh, Gujarat, and Sindh. He died in Sindh and was succeeded by his cousin, Firuz Tughlaq.

        Muhammad Tughlaq’s policies had caused deep discontent among the nobles and the army. He also clashed with Muslim theologians and Sufi saints, who were influential at the time. However, his unpopularity should not be overstated. Even when he was away from the capital for long periods, the administration in Delhi, the Punjab, and other parts of northern India continued to function normally.

        Upon Firuz Tughlaq’s accession, he faced the challenge of preventing the imminent break-up of the Delhi Sultanate. He adopted a policy of appeasing the nobles, the army, and the theologians while asserting his authority over areas that could be easily managed from the center. Firuz made no attempt to reassert control over South India and the Deccan. He led two campaigns into Bengal but was unsuccessful in both, losing Bengal to the Sultanate. Despite this, the Sultanate remained as large as it was during the early years of Alauddin Khalji’s reign. Firuz led a campaign against the ruler of Jajnagar (Orissa), desecrated its temples, and gathered rich plunder but did not attempt to annex Orissa. He also led a campaign against Kangra in the Punjab hills. His longest campaigns involved dealing with rebellions in Gujarat and Thatta. Although the rebellions were crushed, the army suffered great hardship due to losing its way in the Rann of Kutch.

        Firuz was not a distinguished military leader, but his reign was one of peace and quiet development. He decreed that whenever a noble died, his son should succeed him in office and inherit his estate. If the noble had no son, his son-in-law or, in his absence, his slave would inherit the position. Firuz abolished the practice of torturing nobles and their officials if any balance was found against them during auditing. These measures pleased the nobles and contributed to the absence of major rebellions, with minor exceptions in Gujarat and Thatta. However, the policy of making offices hereditary eventually proved harmful, as it limited the recruitment of competent individuals and made the Sultan dependent on a narrow oligarchy.

        Firuz extended this principle of heredity to the army. Old soldiers were allowed to send their sons or sons-in-law to replace them, and if neither was available, their slaves would take their place. Soldiers were paid not in cash but through assignments on land revenue. This system often resulted in soldiers either being absent from service or forced to use middlemen who took a portion of their pay. Consequently, the military became lax, and soldiers could bribe clerks to pass off useless horses during the muster. In a misguided act of generosity, Firuz once gave money to a soldier to bribe the clerk of the muster.

        Firuz also tried to win the favor of the theologians by presenting himself as a truly Islamic king. Despite his outwardly orthodox policies, he maintained the principles of his predecessors in essentials. However, he gave several important concessions to the theologians. He banned practices considered un-Islamic, such as Muslim women visiting the graves of saints, and persecuted Muslim sects deemed heretical. He also made jizya a separate tax, exempting only women, children, the disabled, and the indigent. He even ordered the public execution of a Brahman for preaching against the Sharia. At the same time, Firuz patronized music and, despite his orthodoxy, had a fondness for wine.

        Firuz’s reign also saw significant humanitarian measures. He banned cruel punishments like amputating hands or feet for theft and established hospitals for the free treatment of the poor. He also provided dowries for the daughters of the poor. Although these measures may have primarily benefited Muslims of good families who had fallen on hard times, they reflected Firuz’s belief that the state should be a benevolent institution, not just one that enforced punishments and collected taxes.

        Economically, Firuz was keen on improving the country. He set up a large department of public works to oversee his building projects, including repairing and digging canals for irrigation. The longest canal, about 200 kilometers long, was constructed from the Sutlej river to Hansi. Firuz also established new towns, such as Hissar-Firuzah in modern Haryana and Firuzabad in modern Uttar Pradesh, many of which still exist today.

        Another step that Firuz took was both economic and political in nature. He ordered his officials that whenever they attacked a place, they should select handsome and well-born young boys and send them to the sultan as slaves. In this way, Firuz gradually gathered about 180,000 slaves. Some of these he trained to carry out various handicrafts and posted them in the royal workshops (Rarkhanas) across the empire. From others, he formed a corps of soldiers who would be directly dependent on the sultan, and hence, he hoped, would be completely loyal to him. This policy was not new. As we have seen, the early Turkish sultans in India had followed the practice of recruiting slaves. But experience had shown that these slaves could not be relied upon for their loyalty to the descendants of their masters, and that they soon formed a separate interest group apart from the nobility.

        When Firuz died in 1388, the administrative and political problems which arose after the death of every sultan came to the surface. The struggle for power between the sultan and the nobles began once again. The local zamindars and rajas took advantage of the situation to assume airs of independence. A new factor in this situation was the active intervention of the Firuzian slaves and their attempt to put their own nominee on the throne. Sultan Muhammad, the son of Firuz, was able to stabilize his position with their help. But one of his first steps was to break up the power of the slaves, killing and imprisoning many of them and scattering the rest. However, neither he nor his successor, Nasiruddin Mahmud, who ruled from 1394 to 1412, could control the ambitious nobles and the intransigent rajas. Perhaps the major reason for this was the reforms of Firuz, which had made the nobility too strong and the army inefficient. The governors of provinces became independent, and gradually the sultan of Delhi was confined virtually to a small area surrounding Delhi. As a wit said, “The dominion of the Lord of the Universe (being the title of the sultans of Delhi) extends from Delhi to Palam.”

        The weakness of the Delhi Sultanate was made even worse by Timur’s invasion of Delhi in 1398. Timur, who was a Turk but could claim a blood relationship with Genghis Khan, had started his career of conquest in 1370 and gradually brought under his rule the entire region from Syria to Trans-Oxiana and from southern Russia to the Indus. The raid into India was a plundering raid, with the motive of seizing the wealth accumulated by the sultans of Delhi over the last 200 years. With the collapse of the Delhi Sultanate, there was no one to meet this incursion. Timur’s army mercilessly sacked and plundered the various towns on the way to Delhi. Timur then entered Delhi and sacked it without mercy; large numbers of people, both Hindus and Muslims, as well as women and children, lost their lives.

        Timur’s invasion once again showed the dangers of weak government in the country. It resulted in the drain of large amounts of wealth, gold, silver, jewelry, etc., from India. Timur also took with him a large number of Indian artisans, such as masons, stone cutters, carpenters, etc. Some of them helped him in constructing many fine buildings in his capital, Samarqand. He had adopted a similar policy in the case of many Iranian towns he had captured. But the direct political effect of Timur’s invasion of India was small. The invasion of Timur may, however, be regarded as marking the end of the phase of strong rule by the Delhi sultans, although the Tughlaq dynasty itself lingered on until 1412.

        The responsibility for the disintegration of the Delhi Sultanate cannot be ascribed to any one ruler. We have seen that there were some persistent problems during the medieval period, such as the relations between the monarch and the nobles, the conflict with local rulers and zamindars, and the pull of regional and geographical factors. Individual rulers tried to cope with these problems, but none of them was in a position to effect fundamental changes in society to offset these perennial factors. The disintegration of the political fabric was thus just beneath the surface, and any weakness in the central administration set off a chain of events leading to political disintegration. Firuz was able to contain the chain reactions that had set in due to the over-extension of the empire under Ghiyasuddin and Muhammad Tughlaq. He instituted a series of reforms aimed at appeasing the nobles and the soldiers, which, however, weakened the central machinery of administration, as we have seen.

        The period from 1200 to 1400 saw many new features in Indian life, such as the system of government, changes in the life and condition of the people, and the development of art and architecture. These will be the subject of another chapter.


- Government, and Economic and Social Life under the Delhi Sultanate
    The state established by the Turks towards the end of the twelfth century in northern India gradually developed into a powerful and highly centralized state, which, for some time, controlled almost the entire country, extending as far south as Madurai. The Delhi Sultanate began to disintegrate towards the beginning of the fifteenth century, leading to the establishment of a series of independent states in different parts of the country. However, the administrative system of the Sultanate had a powerful influence on many of these states and also influenced the Mughal system of administration that developed in the sixteenth century.

    THE SULTAN
        Although many of the Turkish sultans in India declared themselves ‘lieutenant of the faithful’ (i.e., of the Abbasid caliph at Baghdad), and included his name in the khutba (Friday prayers), it did not mean that the caliph became the legal ruler. The caliph only held a moral position. By proclaiming their supreme position, the sultans of Delhi were asserting their place within the Islamic world.

        The sultan’s office was the most important in the Sultanate, and supreme political, military, and even legal authority was vested in him. He was responsible for the safety and security of the state, and as such, was in charge of administration and served as the commander-in-chief of the military forces. He was also responsible for maintaining law and justice. To discharge this function, he appointed judges, but the sultan also acted as a court of appeal from the judges. A direct appeal could be made to him against the high-handedness of any of his officials. The dispensation of justice was regarded as a very important function of any ruler. We have referred to the stern manner in which Balban dispensed justice, not sparing even his relatives or high officers of state. Muhammad Tughlaq applied this approach even to the religious classes (ulama) who had previously been exempted from harsh punishments.

        No clear law of succession developed among Muslim rulers. The Islamic theory adhered to the idea of the election of the ruler, but in practice, the succession of any son of a successful ruler was accepted. However, all the sons of a ruler were considered to have an equal claim to the throne. The idea of primogeniture was neither fully acceptable to the Muslims nor to the Hindus. Some rulers did try to nominate one of the sons, not necessarily the eldest, as the successor. Iltutmish even nominated a daughter in preference to his sons. But it was for the nobles to accept such a nomination. While Muslim opinion generally adhered to the idea of legitimacy, there was no safeguard against the usurpation of the throne by a successful military leader, as happened more than once in the Delhi Sultanate. Thus, military strength was the main factor in succession to the throne. However, public opinion could not be ignored. For fear of public opinion, the Khaljis could not dare to enter Delhi for a long time after deposing the successors of Balban, instead building a new town called Siri.

    CENTRAL ADMINISTRATION
        The sultan was assisted by a number of ministers who were chosen by him and remained in office at his pleasure. The number, powers, and functions of the ministers varied from time to time. A definite system of administration developed towards the end of the thirteenth century. The key figure in administration was the wazir. In the earlier period, the wazirs were primarily military leaders. In the fourteenth century, the wazir began to be considered more of an expert in revenue affairs, presiding over a large department dealing with both income and expenditure. Muhammad Tughlaq paid close attention to the organization of the revenue department. His wazir, Khwaja Jahan, was widely respected and was left in charge of the capital when Muhammad Tughlaq went out to deal with rebellions. A separate Auditor General for scrutinizing expenditure and an Accountant General for inspecting income worked under the wazir. Although quarrels between different officers hampered the smooth functioning of the department, the revenue department under Muhammad Tughlaq was able to cope with the affairs of the largest empire that had come into existence in India since the breakup of the Mauryan Empire. Khan-i-Jahan, a converted Tailang Brahman who was deputy to the previous wazir, was chosen by Firuz Tughlaq as his wazir. He enjoyed full authority in the revenue department. His long tenure of 18 years as wazir is generally considered to be the high watermark of the wazir’s influence. Khan-i-Jahan was succeeded as wazir by his son, Khan-i-Jahan II. The attempt of Khan-i-Jahan II to play kingmaker after the death of Firuz, and the failure of that attempt, resulted in a setback to the wazir’s position. The importance of the wazir would only revive under the Mughals.

        The most important department of state, next to the wazir’s, was the diwan-i-arz, or the military department. The head of this department was called the ariz-i-mamalik. The ariz was not the commander-in-chief of the army, as the sultan himself commanded all the armed forces. In those days, no king could have survived on the throne if he entrusted the chief command of the armed forces to someone else. The special responsibility of the ariz’s department was to recruit, equip, and pay the army. The office of the ariz was an important one under the Seljuks, but it is first mentioned in India under Balban as a separate department. He, and later Alauddin Khalji, paid close attention to its working. Alauddin insisted on a regular muster of the armed forces. He also introduced the branding system (dagh) of the horses so that soldiers would not bring poor-quality horses to the muster. A descriptive roll of each soldier was also maintained. The army was posted in different parts of the country, with a strong contingent remaining with the ruler in the capital. Balban kept his army in good condition by making it march long distances on the pretext of undertaking hunting excursions. Of all the Delhi rulers, Alauddin Khalji had the largest standing army. The strength of his army is placed at 300,000 by Barani, though this appears to be an exaggeration. Alauddin was also the first sultan to pay his soldiers fully in cash. Earlier, Turkish soldiers had been assigned a number of villages in the Doab for the payment of their salaries. These soldiers had begun to look upon these assignments as hereditary and were not prepared to give up their posts, even though many of them had become too old and feeble to serve. Balban tried to resume these holdings, but modified his order due to the agitation created by these soldiers and the pleading of his old friend, the Kotwal of Delhi. However, Alauddin abolished these holdings by a stroke of the pen. He paid 238 tangas to a trooper and 78 more to one who maintained two horses. The efficiency of Alauddin’s army was the main factor in his ability to contain the Mongol invasions while simultaneously conquering the Deccan.

        The Turks also maintained a large number of elephants trained for war purposes. A corps of sappers and miners was attached to the army to clear the roads and remove obstacles during the army’s march. The Turks and Afghans predominated in the cavalry, which was considered prestigious. The Hindus were employed both in the cavalry and the infantry during the Ghaznavid period. They continued to be employed, but largely in the infantry, in the subsequent period.

        There were two other important departments of state: the diwan-i-risalat and the diwan-i-insha. The former dealt with religious matters, pious foundations, and stipends for deserving scholars and men of piety. It was presided over by the chief sadr, who was generally a leading gazi. The chief gazi was also the head of the department of justice. Qazis were appointed in various parts of the empire, particularly in places with sizable Muslim populations. The qazis dispensed civil law based on Muslim law (sharia). Hindus were governed by their own personal laws, which were dispensed by panchayats in the villages and by the leaders of various castes in the cities. Criminal law was based on regulations framed by the rulers for the purpose.

        The diwan-i-insha dealt with state correspondence. All correspondence, formal or confidential, between the ruler and the sovereigns of other states, and with his subordinate officials, was dealt with by this department.

        In addition to these, there were a number of other departments. The rulers posted intelligence agents called barids in different parts of the empire to keep them informed of developments. Only a nobleman who enjoyed the fullest confidence of the ruler was appointed the chief barid. The ruler’s household was another important department of state. It looked after the personal comforts of the sultan and the needs of the large numbers of women in the royal household. It also managed a large number of karkhanas or departments where goods and articles needed by the king and the royal household were stored. Sometimes, these articles were manufactured under royal supervision. Firuz Tughlaq set up a separate department for slaves, many of whom were employed in these royal workshops. The officer in charge of these activities was called wakil-i-dar. He was also responsible for maintaining proper decorum at the court and placing nobles in their proper order of precedence at formal receptions. Firuz also established a separate department of public works that built canals and many of his public buildings.

    Local Administration
        When the Turks conquered the country, they divided it into a number of tracts called igtas, which were parcelled out among the leading Turkish nobles. The holders of these offices were called mugtis or walis. It was these tracts that later became provinces or stibas. We are told that under Muhammad Tughlaq there were twenty-four provinces stretching up to Mabar in the south. At first, the mugtis were almost independent; they were expected to maintain law and order in their tracts and collect the land revenue due to the government. Out of the money they collected, they were expected to meet the salaries due to the soldiers and keep the balance. As the central government became stronger and gained experience, it began to control the mugtis more closely. It started to try to ascertain the actual income and to fix the salaries of the soldiers and the mugti in cash. The mugti was now required to remit to the center the balance of the income after meeting the expenditure. The auditing of the accounts, which took place after a couple of years, was often accompanied by harshness, including torture and imprisonment of the mugti. These were relaxed by Firuz Tughlaq towards the end of the Sultanate.

        Below the provinces were the sag and below them the pargana. We do not know much about the administration of these units. We are told that the villagers were grouped into units of 100 to 84 (traditionally called chasrasi). This must have been the basis of the parganas. The pargana was headed by the ami. The most important persons in the village were the zaat (landowners) and muqaddam (headman). We also hear of the village accountant or patwari. We do not know how exactly the village was administered—it was perhaps not interfered with as long as it paid the land revenue due from it.

        In the initial stage, hardly any change was made in the working of the administration at the local level. Land revenue continued to be collected in the same manner, more or less by the same set of people. This must have been a major factor in the Turks establishing their authority in the countryside quickly. The changes we have mentioned began from the time of Alauddin Khalji at the beginning of the fourteenth century, and they led to conflicts, including peasant rebellions.

    Economic and Social Life
        We have very little information about the economic condition of the people under the Delhi Sultanate. The historians of the period were more interested in the events at the court than in the lives of ordinary people. However, they do sometimes tell us the prices of commodities. Ibn Battutah, a resident of Tangier in North Africa, visited India in the fourteenth century and lived at the court of Muhammad Tughlaq for eight years. He traveled widely all over India and has left a very interesting account of the products of the country, including fruits, flowers, herbs, etc., the condition of the roads, and the life of the people. We have some other accounts as well. The food grains and other crops, the fruits, and the flowers mentioned by these travelers are familiar to us. Rice and sugarcane were produced in the east and south, and wheat, oilseeds, etc., in the north. Ibn Battutah says that the soil was so fertile that it could produce two crops every year, rice being sown three times a year. Sesame, indigo, and cotton were also grown. They formed the basis of many village industries, such as oil pressing, making of jaggery, weaving, and dyeing of cloth, etc.

    Peasants and Rural Gentry
        As before, peasants formed the overwhelming majority of the population. The peasants continued to work hard and eke out bare subsistence. There were recurring famines and wars in different parts of the country, and these added to the hardships of the peasants.

        All the peasants did not live at the level of subsistence. Apart from the village artisans and sharecroppers, there was a more prosperous section of people who were owner-cultivators of their lands. They were considered the original settlers of the village and dominated the village panchayat. The village headmen (muqaddams) and smaller landlords (zaats) enjoyed a higher standard of life. In addition to their own holdings, they held lands for which they paid revenue at concessional rates. Sometimes, they misused their offices to force the ordinary peasants to pay their share of the land revenue as well. These people were prosperous enough to ride on costly Arabi and Iraqi horses, wear fine clothes, and behave like members of the upper classes. As we have seen, Alauddin Khalji took stern action against them and curtailed many of their privileges. Even then, they continued to enjoy a standard of life higher than that of the ordinary peasants. It seems that after the death of Alauddin, they were able to resume their own ways.

        A section that enjoyed a high standard of life were the Hindu rais of autonomous rajas, many of whom continued to hold their previous estates. There are a number of references to the visits of the Hindu rais to the court of Balban. There is little doubt that these Hindu rais continued to be powerful even in the area under the direct control of the sultans of Delhi.

    Trade, Industry, and the Merchants
        With the consolidation of the Delhi Sultanate and the improvement of communications, and the establishment of a sound currency system based on the silver tanka and the copper dirham, there was a definite growth of trade in the country. This was marked by the growth of towns and town life. Ibn Battutah calls Delhi the largest city in the eastern part of the Islamic world. He says that Daulatabad (Deogir) equaled Delhi in size—an index of the growth of trade between the north and the south. The other important cities of the times were Lahore and Multan in the northwest, Kara and Lakhnauti in the east, and Anhilwara (Patan) and Cambay (Khambayat) in the west. A modern historian says that, on the whole, ‘the Sultanate presents the picture of a flourishing urban economy.’ Such an economy must have necessitated commerce on a large scale. Bengal and the towns in Gujarat were famous for their fine quality fabrics. Cloth of fine quality was produced in other towns as well. Cambay in Gujarat was famous for textiles and for gold and silver work. Sonatgaon in Bengal was famous for raw silk and fine cotton cloth (called muslin later on). There were many other handicrafts as well, such as leather work, metal work, carpet weaving, woodwork including furniture, stone-cutting, etc., for which India was famous. Some of the new crafts introduced by the Turks included the manufacture of paper. The art of manufacturing paper had been discovered by the Chinese in the second century. It was known in the Arab world in the eighth century, and traveled to Europe only during the fourteenth century.

        The production of textiles was also improved by the introduction of the spinning wheel. Cotton could be cleaned faster and better by the wider use of the cotton carder’s bow (dunia). But there is little doubt that most important was the skill of the Indian craftsmen. Indian textiles had already established their position in the trade to countries on the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf. During this period, fine Indian textiles were introduced to China as well, where they were valued more than silk. India imported from West Asia high-grade textiles (satin, etc.), glassware, and, of course, horses. From China, it imported raw silk and porcelain. Ivory was imported from Africa and spices from Southeast Asia, in return for Indian textiles. Since India had a favorable trade balance, gold and silver came to India from these countries.

        India’s foreign trade, both overland and overseas, was truly an international enterprise. Although the Arabs were the dominant partners in the Indian Ocean trade, they had by no means ousted the Indian traders, viz., the Tamils, Kalingas, and Gujaratis, both Hindu and Muslim. The coastal trade and trade between the coastal ports and north India was in the hands of Marwaris and Gujaratis, many of whom were Jains. The Muslim Bohra merchants also participated in this trade. The overland trade with Central and West Asia was in the hands of Multanis, who were mostly Hindus but included Muslims, who were Khurasanis, Afghans, Iranians, etc. Many of these merchants had settled down in Delhi. The Gujarati and Marwari merchants were extremely wealthy, and some of them, particularly the Jains, spent large sums for the construction of temples. Cambay was a great city in which many wealthy merchants lived. They had lofty houses built in fine stone and mortar, with tiled roofs. Their houses were surrounded by orchards and fruit gardens which had many tanks. These wealthy merchants and the skilled craftsmen lived a luxurious life and were accustomed to good food and clothing. The merchants, Hindu and Muslim, and foreigners were attended by pages bearing swords with silver and gold work. In Delhi, the Hindu merchants rode horses with costly trappings, lived in fine houses, and celebrated their festivals with great pomp and show. Barani tells us that the Multani merchants were so rich that gold and silver were to be found in abundance in their houses alone. The nobles were so extravagant that every time they wanted to hold a feast or a celebration, they had to run to the houses of the Multanis in order to borrow money.

        In those days, travel was always risky due to robbers, dacoits, and various marauding tribes. However, the royal roads were kept in good shape, and there were many sarais on the way for the comfort and safety of the travelers. In addition to the royal road from Peshawar to Sonargaon, Muhammad Tughlaq built a road to Daulatabad. There were arrangements for the post being carried quickly from one part of the country to another. This was done by relays of horses or even more efficiently and quickly by runners who were posted every few kilometers in towers built for the purpose. The runner continually clanged a bell as he ran so that the man on the next relay could see him from the tower and get ready to take his burden. We are told that by means of these relays, fresh fruits were obtained for the Sultan from Khurasan. When Muhammad Tughlaq was at Daulatabad, which was a 40-day journey from Delhi, he regularly used to receive Ganga water for drinking purposes by means of these relays.

        Economic life was quickened in the period by the improvement of communications and the growth of trade, both overland and by sea. The Turks introduced or popularized a number of new crafts and techniques. We have already referred to the use of the iron stirrup, and a large-scale use of armor, both for the horse and the rider for heavy and light cavalry preferred by the new rulers. This led to the growth of the metallurgical industry and metal crafts.

        An even more important development was the improvement of the rakat (miscalled the Persian wheel) so that water could be lifted from a deeper level for irrigation. The other crafts included paper-making, glass-making, the spinning wheel, and an improved loom for weaving.

        Mention may also be made of the introduction of a superior mortar which enabled the Turks to erect magnificent buildings based on the arch and the dome. Not all these crafts were new, but their expansion and improvement, and agricultural growth were two of the most important factors which made the second half of the fourteenth century a period of growth and relative affluence.

    THE SULTAN AND THE NOBLES
        The Sultan and his chief nobles enjoyed a standard of living comparable to the highest standards in the world at that time, namely, the standards of the ruling class in the Islamic world in West and Central Asia. While Europe was still trying to overcome its backwardness, the opulence and wealth of the ruling classes in the Islamic world were dazzling, setting a standard that the ruling classes in every country tried to emulate. Like the Hindu rulers, almost every sultan in India built his own palace. Balban had a dazzling court designed to impress and instill a sense of awe in the hearts of visitors. Alauddin Khalji and his successors followed this tradition. The palace of Muhammad Tughlaq has been described by Ibn Battutah. A person wishing to visit the sultan had to pass through three lofty gates, heavily guarded. He then entered the ‘Court of Thousand Pillars,’ a huge hall supported by polished wooden pillars, decorated with costly materials and furnishings. This was the place where the sultan held his public court.

        Muhammad Tughlaq used to present two robes of honour, one for the cold season and the other for the hot season, to each of his nobles. It is estimated that he presented 200,000 robes every year. These robes, woven in the royal workshops, generally consisted of imported cloth—velvet, damask, or wool—on which brocade and costly materials were used. They must have cost an enormous sum. Numerous gifts were bestowed upon the nobles and others on festive occasions such as the sultan’s birthday, the Navroz (Persian New Year), and the annual coronation day.

        The royal Aarkhanas, which we have referred to earlier, catered to all the needs of the sultan. They manufactured costly articles made of silk, gold, silverware, etc. They also stored rare and choice goods. The superintendents of the stores were instructed by Firuz Tughlaq to buy finely finished articles wherever and at whatever price they were available. It is said that on one occasion, a single pair of shoes for the sultan cost 70,000 tankas. Most of the articles of royal use were worked in gold and silver, embroidered, and adorned with jewels. The stores also catered to the women in the Harem.

        Almost every sultan had a Harem containing queens and a large number of slaves from various countries. A large number of servants and slaves, both men and women, were employed to safeguard them and look after their comforts. All the women relatives of the sultan, including his mother, aunts, etc., also lived in the Harem. Separate accommodations had to be provided for each of them.

        The nobles tried to emulate the sultans in their ostentatious living. They had magnificent palaces, used costly articles of apparel, and were surrounded by a large number of servants, slaves, and retainers. They vied with each other in holding lavish feasts and festivals. However, some of the nobles also patronized men of art and letters.

        Alauddin sternly repressed the nobles, but the ostentatious mode of life revived under his successors. The nobility came into its own under the Tughlaqs. Due to the rapid expansion of the empire, large salaries and allowances were given to the nobles by Muhammad Tughlaq. It is said that his vizier enjoyed an income as large as that of the province of Iraq. The other leading ministers received between 20,000 to 40,000 tankas a year, with the chief Sadr receiving 60,000 tankas a year.

        Khan-i-Jahan, the wazir of Firuz Tughlaq, used to get 15 lakhs. His sons and sons-in-law, who were numerous, received separate allowances.

        During the Tughlaq period, many nobles were able to acquire large fortunes. Thus, Bashir, who was Firuz’s Ariz-i-Mamalik, left 13 crores at his death. On the grounds that Bashir had originally been his slave, Firuz confiscated most of his wealth and distributed the rest among his sons. This may be regarded as an exception. Generally, the property of a noble was safe and passed on to his sons. It was this section that bought lands on which they built gardens, orchards, markets, etc. The sultan and his nobles took a keen interest in improving the quality of fruits in India, especially melons and grapes. Firuz Tughlaq is said to have built 1,200 orchards in the vicinity of Delhi.

        In this way, a new type of landed gentry began to develop. The breakup of the Delhi Sultanate towards the beginning of the fifteenth century halted this trend.

    Town Life: Slaves, Artisans, and Others
        We have already mentioned the revival of towns and town life under the Sultanate. The Turkish ruling class was essentially an urban ruling class with a taste for town life. Many of the towns grew around military garrisons, providing food, goods, and services to them. In due course, many of these towns emerged as cultural centers as well.

        The medieval towns had a miscellaneous population, including many nobles, a large class of clerks for running government offices, shopkeepers, artisans, beggars, etc. The posts of clerks and lower government officials had, obviously, to be given to people who could read and write. Since teaching was largely in the hands of the Muslim theologians (ulama), the ulama and these lower officials tended to think and behave alike. Most of the historians were drawn from this section, and their writings reflect the opinions and prejudices of this section. Beggars, who generally wore arms like the ordinary citizens, formed a large mass and could sometimes create problems related to law and order.

        Another large section of the town population consisted of slaves and domestic servants. Slavery had existed in India as well as in West Asia and Europe for a long time. The position of different types of slaves—born in the household, purchased, acquired, or inherited—is discussed in the Hindu Shastras. Slavery had been adopted by the Arabs and later by the Turks as well. The most common method of acquiring a slave was through capture in war. Even the Mahabharata considered it normal to enslave a prisoner of war. The Turks practiced this on a large scale in their wars, both inside and outside India. Slave markets for men and women existed in West Asia as well as in India. The Turkish, Caucasian, Greek, and Indian slaves were valued and sought after. A small number of slaves were also imported from Africa, mainly Abyssinia. Slaves were generally bought for domestic service, for companionship, or for their special skills. Skilled slaves or comely boys and handsome girls sometimes fetched a high price. Skilled slaves were valued, and some of them rose to high offices, as in the case of the slaves of Qutbuddin Aibak. Firuz Tughlaq also prized slaves and collected about 180,000 of them. Many of them were employed in handicrafts, while others formed the sultan’s personal bodyguard. However, the largest number of slaves were used for personal service. These slaves were sometimes treated harshly.

        It can be argued that the condition of slaves was better than that of domestic servants because the master of a slave was obliged to provide food and shelter, while a free person might starve to death. Slaves were allowed to marry and own some personal property. However, it was widely accepted that slavery was degrading. Granting a slave freedom was considered a meritorious act, both among Hindus and Muslims.

        In general, food grains were cheap for the townsfolk during the Sultanate period. We have mentioned the price of food grains under Alauddin Khalji. During his reign, one man (about 135 kg) of wheat was sold for 74 jitals, barley for 4, and rice for 5 jitals, with 48 jitals being equal to a silver tanka. Prices rose sharply under Muhammad Tughlaq but declined almost to Alauddin’s level under Firuz. It is possible that this was due to the extension of cultivation during his reign.

        It is difficult to compute the cost of living in towns. A modern historian has estimated that during Firuz’s reign, a family consisting of a man, his wife, a servant, and one or two children could live on five tankas for a whole month. Thus, for a lower government official or soldier, living was cheap. But this did not apply to the artisan and workers in the same way. In Alauddin Khalji’s reign, the wages of an artisan amounted to 2 or 3 jitals per day or about 14 to 20 tankas per month. Household servants were paid even less. Even under Akbar, an unskilled laborer earned 2 to 4 rupees a month, or even less. In terms of their income, the living conditions of artisans and workers in towns appear to have been hard.

        Thus, medieval society was one of great inequalities. This was reflected in Muslim society even more than in Hindu society, the latter being predominantly rural where inequalities were less marked. In towns, the Muslim nobility led a life of great ostentation. Some of the wealthy merchants, both Hindu and Muslim, also led lives of ostentation. The great mass of people, in towns as well as in the countryside, lived a simple life and often had to face many hardships. However, it was not a life without joy, as numerous festivals, fairs, etc., relieved, to some extent, the monotony of their lives.

    Caste, Social Manners, and Customs
        There were hardly any changes in the structure of Hindu society during this period. The smriti writers of the time continued to assign a high place to the Brahmans while strongly denouncing the unworthy members of the order. According to one school of thought, the Brahmans were permitted to engage in agriculture, not only in times of distress but also in normal times, since officiating at sacrifices, etc., did not furnish means of subsistence in the Kali Age.

        The smriti texts continue to emphasize that punishing the wicked and cherishing the good was the duty of the Kshatriya, and that the right to wield weapons for the purpose of protecting the people belonged to him alone. The duties and occupations of Shudras were more or less repeated. While the highest duty of the Shudra was the service of the other castes, he was allowed to engage in all occupations, except dealing in liquor and meat. The ban on the study and recitation of the Vedas by Shudras was reiterated, but not on hearing the recitation of the Puranas. Some writers go as far as to say that not only eating a Shudra’s food but also living in the same house with him, sitting on the same cot, and receiving religious instructions from a learned Shudra were to be avoided. This may be regarded as an extreme view. However, the severest restrictions were placed on mingling with the Chandalas and other ‘outcastes’.

        There was little change in the position of women in Hindu society. The old rules enjoining early marriage for girls, and the wife’s obligation of service and devotion to the husband continued. Annulment of the marriage was allowed in special circumstances, such as desertion, loathsome disease, etc. But not all writers agree with this. Widow remarriage was prohibited in the Kali Age, but this apparently applied only to the three upper castes. Regarding the practice of sati, some writers approved it emphatically, while others allowed it with some conditions. A number of travelers mention its prevalence in different regions of the country.

        Ibn Battuta mentions with horror the scene of a woman burning herself on the funeral pyre of her husband with great beating of drums. According to him, permission from the sultan had to be obtained for the performance of sati.

        Regarding property, the commentators upheld the widow’s right to the property of a sonless husband, provided the property was not joint (i.e., had been divided). The widow was not merely the guardian of this property, but had the full right to dispose of it. Thus, it would appear that the property rights of women improved under Hindu law.

        During this period, the practice of keeping women in seclusion and asking them to veil their faces in the presence of outsiders, i.e., the practice of purdah, became widespread among upper-class women. The practice of secluding women from the vulgar gaze was practiced among upper-class Hindus, and was also in vogue in ancient Iran, Greece, etc. The Arabs and the Turks adopted this custom and brought it to India with them. Due to their influence, it became widespread in India, particularly in northern India. The growth of purdah has been attributed to the fear of Hindu women being captured by invaders. In an age of violence, women were liable to be treated as prizes of war. Perhaps, the most important factor for the growth of purdah was social—it became a symbol of the higher classes in society, and all those who wanted to be considered respectable tried to copy it. Also, religious justification was found for it. Whatever the reason, it affected women adversely and made them even more dependent on men.

        During the Sultanate period, Muslim society remained divided into ethnic and racial groups. We have already noticed the deep economic disparities within it. The Turks, Iranians, Afghans, and Indian Muslims rarely intermarried. In fact, these sections developed some of the caste exclusiveness of the Hindus. Converts from lower sections of the Hindus were also discriminated against.

        The Hindu and Muslim upper classes did not have much social interaction, partly due to the religious restrictions on the part of the Hindus regarding intermarriage and inter-dining. The Hindu upper castes applied to the Muslims the same restrictions they applied to the Shudras. However, it should be borne in mind that caste restrictions did not close social intercourse between the Muslims and the upper-caste Hindus or the Shudras. At various times, Hindu soldiers were enrolled in Muslim armies. Most of the nobles had Hindus as their personal managers. The local machinery of administration remained almost entirely in the hands of the Hindus. Thus, occasions for mutual intercourse were manifold. The picture of the two communities being confined within themselves and having little to do with each other is, thus, neither real nor one that could be practiced. Nor is it borne out by the evidence available to us. Conflicts of interest, as well as differences in social and cultural ideas, practices, and beliefs, did, however, create tensions and slowed down the processes of mutual understanding and cultural assimilation. These will be dealt with in a subsequent chapter.

    Nature of the State
        The Turkish state in India was militaristic and aristocratic. The Turkish nobles tried, at first, to monopolize the high offices of state, denying a share to the Tajiks, Afghans, and other non-Turkish immigrants. The nobility acquired a broader base only under the Tughlaqs. However, noble birth still remained a very important qualification for high office. The vast majority of Muslims, as well as Hindus, therefore had little opportunity to occupy high offices of state. Of course, the Muslims in the towns had a better chance of being enrolled in the armies and obtaining state employment. The Hindus dominated trade and constituted the rural aristocracy, as well as the lower administrative wing, without whose cooperation the state could not function. A kind of tacit sharing of power between the rural Hindu aristocracy and the city-based administrators was, thus, a factor of capital importance for the Delhi Sultanate, though there were frequent conflicts between these two sections. Often given a religious color, the basic causes for the struggle between them were secular, such as fights for power and land, or rather, for a share of the surplus produced by land, since land was not generally sold in those times. The Muslims also fought among themselves for the attainment of these objectives.

        In a formal sense, the state was Islamic. The Sultans were keen to emphasize the Muslim character of the state and to follow the Holy Law (sharia) as far as possible. This also meant not allowing any open violation of Islamic law. They appointed Muslim divines to profitable offices of state and granted revenue-free lands to many of them. However, the sultans did not allow the Muslim divines to dictate the policy of the state. We are told that during the reign of Iltutmish, a group of Muslim divines approached the sultan and asked him to enforce Muslim law strictly, giving the Hindus the option of either Islam or death. On behalf of the sultan, his wazir told the theologians that this was impractical and impolitic since the Muslims were so few (in number), like salt in a dish of food.

        The sultans had to supplement Muslim law by framing their own regulations (zawabit). Alauddin Khalji told the leading gazi of the city that he did not know what was lawful or unlawful but framed laws according to the needs of the state. This is why the historian Barani refused to consider the state in India as truly Islamic, but rather one based on worldly or secular considerations (Gehandart).

        As for the Hindu subjects, from the time of the Arab invasion of Sind, they had been given the status of zimmis or protected people, i.e., those who accepted Muslim rule and agreed to pay a tax called jizyah. This was really a tax in lieu of military service and was paid on a graduated scale according to means. Women, children, and the indigent, who had insufficient means, were exempted from it. The Brahmins also remained exempt, though this was not provided for in Muslim law. At first, jizyah was collected along with land revenue. In fact, it was difficult to distinguish jizyah from land revenue since all the cultivators were Hindus. Later, Firuz, while abolishing many illegal cesses, made jizyah a separate tax. He levied it on the Brahmins as well. Sometimes, the theologians who were in charge of collecting the tax tried to use it to humiliate and harass the Hindus. However, jizyah by itself could not be a means to force the Hindus to convert to Islam. In general, it might be said that medieval states were not based on the idea of equality, but on the notion of privileges. Before the Turks, the Rajputs and, to some extent, the Brahmins formed the privileged sections. They were replaced by the Turks. Later, the Turks and others, including the Iranians, the Afghans, and a narrow group of Indian Muslims, formed the privileged sections. The Muslim theologians were also a part of this privileged group. For the large bulk of the Hindus, who were not included in the privileged group earlier, this change did not affect their daily lives, which continued in the same manner as before.

        Thus, while claiming to be Islamic, the state was militaristic and aristocratic in character, dominated by a narrow clique of military leaders, headed by and under the control of the sultan.

    Religious Freedom Under the Sultanat
        The extent of religious freedom accorded to non-Muslims under the Delhi Sultanat can be seen in this context. In the early phase of the conquest, many cities were sacked, with temples being a special target, partly to justify the conquest and partly to seize the fabulous treasures they were supposed to contain. During this period, a number of Hindu temples were converted into mosques. The most notable example of this is the Quwwat-ul-Islam mosque near the Qutub Minar in Delhi. Formerly, it had been a Vishnu temple. In order to convert it into a mosque, the inner sanctum, which contained the deity, was pulled down, and in front of it, a screen of arches containing inscribed verses from the Quran was put up. Pillars from many temples were used to create a cloister around the courtyard. The courtyard has remained more or less intact. This was done in a number of other places, such as Ajmer. But as soon as the Turks were settled, they started building their own mosques. Their policy towards temples and places of worship of the Hindus, Jains, etc., rested on Muslim law (sharia), which forbade new places of worship being built “in opposition to Islam.” However, it allowed the repair of old temples “since buildings cannot last forever.” This meant that there was no ban on erecting temples in villages, since there were no practices of Islam there. Similarly, temples could be built within the privacy of homes. But this policy of limited toleration was not followed during times of war. In such times, the enemies of Islam, whether human beings or gods, were to be fought and destroyed.

        In times of peace, however, within the Turkish territories and in those areas where the rajas had submitted to Muslim rule, the Hindus practiced their religion openly and even ostentatiously. According to Barani, Jalaluddin Khalji observed that even in the capital and provincial centers, idols were publicly worshipped, and Hindu texts were publicly preached. “The Hindus pass beneath the wall of the royal palace in processions, singing, dancing, and beating drums to immerse the idols in the Yamuna, and I am helpless,” he said.

        Despite the pressure from a section of orthodox theologians and the narrow approach of some sultans and their supporters, this policy of “toleration within limits” was maintained during the Sultanat, though with occasional lapses. Sometimes, prisoners of war were converted, or criminals were exempted from punishment if they accepted Islam. Firuz executed a Brahman on a charge of abusing the Prophet of Islam.

        On the whole, conversions to Islam were not effected through the strength of the sword. If that were the case, the Hindu population of the Delhi region would have been the first to be converted. The Muslim rulers had realized that the Hindu faith was too strong to be destroyed by force. Shaikh Nizamuddin Auliya, the famous Sufi saint of Delhi, observed, “Some Hindus know that Islam is a true religion, but they do not embrace Islam.” Barani also says that attempts to use force had no effect on the Hindus. He uses a very picturesque simile: “Though cowed down, they have plucked Islam from their hearts as a hair is discarded while kneading flour.”

        Conversions to Islam were often due to hopes of political gain, economic advantage, or to improve one’s social position. Sometimes, when an important ruler or tribal chief converted, his example was followed by his subjects. In some areas, such as West Punjab, the valley of Kashmir, and East Bengal, where tribal peoples were induced to become cultivators, they changed their earlier beliefs and accepted the faith of the ruling elements—in this case, Islam. In the towns, many artisans, following the new crafts introduced by the Turks or depending on the patronage of the ruling class, such as weavers, ironworkers, and paper-makers, converted to Islam. The Sufi saints too played a role, though they were generally unconcerned with conversions and welcomed both Hindus and Muslims to their discourses. The saintly character of some of the Sufi saints created a receptive climate for Islam. However, there is no evidence that large numbers of persons belonging to the lower castes embraced Islam due to discrimination against them in Hindu society or due to the influence of the Sufi saints. Conversions, therefore, were due to personal, political, and, in some cases, regional factors (as in Punjab, East Bengal, etc.).

        Following the Mongol invasion of West Asia, many persons from prominent Muslim families fled to India. There was also a steady influx of Afghans into India. Many of them enrolled in the Turkish armies or were engaged in trade. A further influx of Afghans took place in the fifteenth century under the Lodi rule. Despite this, the number of Muslims in India remained comparatively small. The nature of Hindu-Muslim relations and the cultural attitudes of the two, which will be examined in a subsequent chapter, were conditioned by this situation.


- The Age of Vijayanagara and the Bahmanids, and the Coming of the Portuguese (Circa 1350-1565)
    The Vijayanagara and Bahmani kingdoms dominated India south of the Vindhyas for more than 200 years. They not only built magnificent capitals and cities, beautified them with many splendid buildings, and promoted arts and letters, but also provided for law and order and the development of commerce and handicrafts. Thus, while the forces of disintegration gradually triumphed in northern India, southern India and the Deccan enjoyed a long spell of stable governments. This ended with the disintegration of the Bahmani empire towards the end of the fifteenth century and of the Vijayanagara empire more than fifty years later, after its defeat in 1565 in the Battle of Bannihatti. Meanwhile, Indian history was transformed by two major events: the arrival of the Portuguese in southern India and their attempt to dominate the Indian seas, and the advent of the Mughals in northern India. The coming of the Mughals paved the way for another period of integration in northern India. The arrival of the Portuguese marked the beginning of a long era of confrontation between land-based Asian powers and European powers that dominated the seas.

    The Vijayanagara Empire—Its Foundation and Conflict with the Bahmani Kingdom
        The Vijayanagara kingdom was founded by Harihara and Bukka, who belonged to a family of five brothers. According to a legend, they had been the feudatories of the Kakatiyas of Warangal and later became ministers in the kingdom of Kampili in modern Karnataka.

        When Kampili was overrun by Muhammad Tughlaq for giving refuge to a Muslim rebel, the two brothers were imprisoned, converted to Islam, and appointed to deal with the rebellions there. The Muslim governor of Madurai had already declared himself independent, and the Hoysala ruler of Mysore and the ruler of Warangal were also trying to assert their independence. After a short time, Harihara and Bukka forsook their new master and faith. At the instance of their guru, Vidyaranya, they were re-admitted to Hinduism and established their capital at Vijayanagara. Some modern scholars do not accept the tradition of their conversion to Islam, but consider them to be among the nayaks of Karnataka who had rebelled against Turkish rule.

        The date of Harihara’s coronation is placed at 1336. At first, the young king had to contend both with the Hoysala ruler of Mysore and the Sultan of Madurai. The Sultan of Madurai was ambitious. He had defeated the Hoysala ruler and executed him in a barbarous manner. The dissolution of the Hoysala kingdom enabled Harihara and Bukka to expand their tiny principality. By 1346, the whole of the Hoysala kingdom had passed into the hands of the Vijayanagara rulers. In this struggle, Harihara and Bukka were aided by their brothers and relatives who took up the administration of the areas conquered by their efforts. The Vijayanagara kingdom was, thus, initially a kind of cooperative commonwealth. Bukka succeeded his brother to the throne of Vijayanagara in 1356 and ruled until 1377.

        The rising power of the Vijayanagara empire brought it into conflict with many powers both in the south and to the north. In the south, its main rivals were the Sultans of Madurai. The struggle between Vijayanagara and the Sultans of Madurai lasted for about four decades. By 1377, the Sultanate of Madurai had been wiped out. The Vijayanagara empire then comprised the whole of south India up to Rameshwaram, including the Tamil country as well as that of the Cheras (Kerala). To the north, however, Vijayanagara faced a powerful enemy in the shape of the Bahmani kingdom. The Bahmani kingdom had come into existence in 1347. Its founder was Alauddin Hasan, an Afghan adventurer. He had risen in the service of a Brahman named Gangu, and is therefore known as Hasan Gangu. After his coronation, he assumed the title of Alauddin Hasan Bahman Shah. He is said to have traced his descent from a half-mythical hero of Iran, Bahman Shah. But according to a popular legend mentioned by Ferishta, the word Bahman Shah was meant to be a tribute to his Brahman patron. In any case, it is from this title that the kingdom was called the Bahmani kingdom.

        The interests of the Vijayanagara rulers and the Bahmani Sultans clashed in three separate and distinct areas: in the Tungabhadra doab, in the Krishna-Godavari delta, and in the Marathwada country. The Tungabhadra doab was the region between the rivers Krishna and Tungabhadra and consisted of 30,000 square miles. Due to its wealth and economic resources, it had been the bone of contention between the Western Chalukyas and the Cholas in the earlier period, and between the Yadavas and the Hoysalas later on. The struggle for the mastery of the Krishna—Godavari basin, which was very fertile and controlled the foreign trade of the region with its numerous ports, was often linked with the struggle for the Tungabhadra doab. In the Maratha country, the main contention was for the control of the Konkan and the areas which provided access to it. The Konkan was a narrow strip of land between the Western Ghats and the sea. It was extremely fertile and included within it the port of Goa, which was an important outlet for the products of the region, as well as for the import of horses from Iran and Iraq. As has been noted earlier, good quality horses were not bred in India, so the import of horses from Goa was of great importance to the southern states.

        Military conflicts between the Vijayanagara and Bahmani kingdoms were almost a regular feature and lasted as long as these kingdoms continued. These conflicts resulted in widespread devastation of the contested areas and neighboring territories, with a considerable loss of life and property. Both sides sacked and burned towns and villages, imprisoned and sold into slavery men, women, and children, and committed various other barbarities. In 1367, when Bukka assaulted the fortress of Mudkal in the disputed Tungabhadra doab, he slaughtered the entire garrison, except one man. When this news reached the Bahmani Sultan, he was enraged and vowed that he would not sheath his sword until he had slaughtered one hundred thousand Hindus in revenge. In spite of the rainy season and the opposition of the Vijayanagara forces, he crossed the Tungabhadra, the first time a Bahmani Sultan had personally entered Vijayanagara territories. The Vijayanagara king was defeated in the battle and retreated into the jungle. We hear for the first time of the use of artillery by both sides during this battle. The victory of the Bahmani Sultan was due to his superior artillery and more efficient cavalry. The war dragged on for several months, but the Bahmani Sultan could neither capture the Raja nor his capital. In the meantime, wholesale slaughter of men, women, and children continued. Finally, both sides were exhausted and decided to conclude a treaty. This treaty restored the old position, whereby the doab was shared between the two. Even more importantly, it was agreed that, since the two kingdoms would remain neighbors for a long time, it was advisable to avoid cruelty in war. It was stipulated that in future wars, helpless and unarmed inhabitants should not be slaughtered. Although this accord was not fully implemented, it helped make warfare in south India more humane.

        Having strengthened its position in south India by eliminating the Sultanate of Madurai, the Vijayanagara empire embarked upon a policy of expansion towards the eastern seacoast under Harihara II (1377-1404). There were a series of Hindu principalities in the region, the most notable being the Reddis on the upper reaches of the delta, and the rulers of Warangal in the lower reaches of the Krishna-Godavari delta. The rulers of Orissa to the north, as well as the Bahmani Sultans, were also interested in this area. Although the ruler of Warangal had helped Hasan Gangu in his struggle against Delhi, his successor had invaded Warangal and seized the stronghold of Kaulas and the hill fort of Golconda. Vijayanagara had been too busy in the south to intervene. The Bahmani Sultan fixed Golconda as the boundary of his kingdom and promised that neither he nor his successors would encroach on Warangal any further. To seal this agreement, the ruler of Warangal presented to the Bahmani Sultan a throne set with valuable jewels. It is said that it had been originally prepared as a present for Muhammad Tughlaq. The alliance of the Bahmani kingdom and Warangal lasted for over 50 years, and was a major factor in the inability of Vijayanagara to overrun the Tungabhadra doab or stem the Bahmani offensive in the area.

        The battles between Vijayanagara and the Bahmanis are described in great detail by medieval writers. However, they are not of much historical importance to us, as the positions of the two sides remained more or less the same, with the fortunes of war swinging sometimes to one side and sometimes to the other. Harihara II was able to maintain his position in the face of the Bahmani-Warangal combine. His greatest success was in wresting Belgaum and Goa in the west from the Bahmani kingdom. He also sent an expedition to northern Sri Lanka.

        After a period of confusion, Harihara II was succeeded by Deva Raya I (1404-1422). Early in his reign, there was a renewed fight for the Tungabhadra doab. He was defeated by the Bahmani ruler Firuz Shah, and had to pay ten lakhs of gold and pearls and elephants as an indemnity. He also agreed to marry his daughter to the Sultan, ceding to him in dowry Bankapur in the doab to avoid any future dispute. The marriage was celebrated with great pomp and show. When Firuz Shah Bahmani arrived near Vijayanagara for the marriage, Deva Raya came out of the city and met him with a show of great splendor. From the gate of the city to the palace, a distance of ten km, the road was spread with cloths of gold, velvet, satin, and other rich fabrics. The two monarchs rode on horseback together from the center of the city square. The relations of Deva Raya joined the cavalcade, marching on foot before the two kings. The festivities lasted three days.

        This was not the first political marriage of its type in South India. Earlier, the ruler of Kerala in Gondwana had married his daughter to Firuz Shah Bahmani to effect peace. It is said that this princess was the favorite queen of Firuz. However, these marriages could not, by themselves, bring about peace. The question of the Krishna-Godavari basin led to a renewed conflict between Vijayanagara, the Bahmani kingdom, and Orissa. Following confusion in the Reddi kingdom, Deva Raya entered into an alliance with Warangal to partition the kingdom between them. Warangal’s defection from the Bahmani kingdom changed the balance of power in the Deccan. Deva Raya was able to inflict a shattering defeat on Firuz Shah Bahmani and annex the entire Reddi territory up to the mouth of the Krishna River.

        Deva Raya I did not neglect the arts of peace. He constructed a dam across the Tungabhadra so that he could bring the canals into the city to relieve the shortage of water. It irrigated the neighboring fields also, for we are told that the canals increased his revenues by 350,000 pardaos. He also built a dam on the river Haridra for irrigation purposes.

        After some confusion, Deva Raya I (1425-1446), considered the greatest ruler of the dynasty, ascended the throne at Vijayanagara. In order to strengthen his army, he reorganized it, incorporating many features of the armies of the Delhi Sultanate. According to Ferishta, Deva Raya II felt that the superiority of the Bahmani army was due to their sturdier horses and large body of mounted archers. He, therefore, enlisted 2,000 Muslim cavalrymen, gave them jagirs, and commanded all his Hindu soldiers and officers to learn the art of archery from them. The employment of Muslims in the Vijayanagara army was not new, for Deva Raya I is said to have kept 10,000 Muslims in his army. Ferishta tells us that Deva Raya I assembled 60,000 Hindus well-skilled in archery, besides 80,000 cavalry and 200,000 infantry. These figures may be exaggerated. However, the collection of a large cavalry force and standing army made the Vijayanagara empire a more centralized polity than any of the earlier Hindu kingdoms in the south, even though it must have put a strain on the resources of the state since most of the good mounts had to be imported, and the Arabs, who controlled the trade, charged high prices for them.

        With his new army, Deva Raya II crossed the Tungabhadra river in 1443 and tried to recover Mudkal, Bankapur, etc., which were south of the Krishna river and had been lost to the Bahmani sultans earlier. Three hard battles were fought, but in the end, the two sides had to agree to the existing frontiers.

        Nuniz, a Portuguese writer of the sixteenth century, tells us that the kings of Quilon, Sri Lanka, Pulicat, Pegu, and Tenasserim (in Burma and Malaya) paid tribute to Deva Raya II. It is doubtful whether the Vijayanagara rulers were powerful enough on the sea to extract regular tribute from Pegu and Tenasserim. Perhaps, what was meant was that the rulers of these countries were in contact with Vijayanagara and had sent presents and embassies to secure its goodwill. Sri Lanka, however, had been invaded a number of times. This could not have been attained without a strong navy.

        Under a series of capable rulers, Vijayanagara emerged as the most powerful and wealthy state in the south during the first half of the fifteenth century. The Italian traveller Nicolo Conti, who visited Vijayanagara in 1420, had left us a graphic account of it. He says: “The circumference of the city is sixty miles, its walls carried up to the mountains, and enclose the valleys at their foot… In this city, there are estimated to be ninety thousand men fit to bear arms. Their king is more powerful than all the other kings in India.” Ferishta also says: “The princes of the house of Bahmani maintained their superiority by valor only; for in power, wealth, and the extent of the country, the rayas of Beejanagar (Vijayanagara) greatly exceeded them.”

        The Persian traveller Abdur Razzaq, who had travelled widely in and outside India, visited Vijayanagara in the reign of Deva Raya II. He gives a glowing account of the country, saying: “This latter prince has in his dominions three hundred ports, each of which is equal to Calicut, and on terra firma his territories comprise a space of three months’ journey.” All travelers agree that the country was thickly populated, with numerous towns and villages. Abdur Razzaq says: “The country is for the most part well cultivated, very fertile. The troops amount in number to eleven lakhs.”

        Abdur Razzaq considers Vijayanagara to be one of the most splendid cities anywhere in the world that he had seen or heard of. Describing the city, he says: “It is built in such a manner that seven citadels and the same number of walls enclose each other. The seventh fortress, which is placed in the center of the others, occupies an area ten times larger than the marketplace of the city of Herat.” Starting from the palace, there were four bazars “which were extremely long and broad.” As was the Indian custom, people belonging to one caste or profession lived in one quarter of the town. The Muslims appear to have lived in separate quarters provided for them. In the bazars as well as in the king’s palace, “one sees numerous running streams and canals formed of chiselled stone, polished and smooth.” Another later traveler says that the city was larger than Rome, one of the biggest towns in the western world at that time.

        The kings of Vijayanagara were reputed to be very wealthy. Abdur Razzaq mentions the tradition that “in the king’s palace are several cell-like basins filled with bullion, forming one mass.” The hoarding of wealth by a ruler was an ancient tradition. However, such hoarded wealth remained out of circulation, and sometimes invited foreign attacks.

    The Bahmani Kingdom—Its Expansion and Disintegration
        The history of the rise of the Bahmani kingdom and its conflict with the Vijayanagara empire until the death of Deva Raya II (1446) has already been traced. The most remarkable figure in the Bahmani kingdom during this period was Firuz Shah Bahmani (1397-1422). He was well-acquainted with religious sciences, including commentaries on the Quran, jurisprudence, etc., and was particularly fond of the natural sciences such as botany, geometry, logic, etc. He was a good calligrapher and a poet who often composed extempore verses. According to Ferishta, he was well-versed not only in Persian, Arabic, and Turkish but also in Telugu, Kannada, and Marathi. He had a large number of wives in his harem from various countries and regions, including many Hindu wives, and we are told that he used to converse with each of them in their own language.

        Firuz Shah Bahmani was determined to make the Deccan the cultural center of India. The decline of the Delhi Sultanate helped him, for many learned people migrated from Delhi to the Deccan. The king also encouraged learned men from Iran and Iraq. He used to say that kings should draw around them the learned and meritorious persons of all nations so that from their society they might obtain information and thus acquire some of the advantages gained by traveling to different regions of the globe. He generally spent his time until midnight in the company of divines, poets, reciters of history, and the most learned and witty among his courtiers. He had read the Old and New Testaments and respected the tenets of all religions. Ferishta calls him an orthodox Muslim, with his only weakness being his fondness for drinking wine and listening to music.

        The most remarkable step taken by Firuz Shah Bahmani was the induction of Hindus into the administration on a large scale. It is said that from his time, the Deccani Brahmins became dominant in the administration, particularly in the revenue administration. The Deccani Hindus also provided a balance against the influx of foreigners. Firuz Shah Bahmani encouraged the pursuit of astronomy and built an observatory near Daulatabad. He paid much attention to the principal ports of his kingdom, Chaul and Dabhol, which attracted trading ships from the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea, bringing in luxury goods from all parts of the world.

        Firuz Bahmani started the Bahmani expansion towards Berar by defeating the Gond Raja, Narsing Rai of Kherla. The Rai made a present of 40 elephants, 5 maunds of gold, and 50 maunds of silver. A daughter of the Rai was also married to Firuz. Kherla was restored to Narsing, who was made an Amir of the kingdom and given robes of state, including an embroidered cap.

        Firuz Shah Bahmani’s marriage to a daughter of Deva Raya I and his subsequent battles against Vijayanagara have been mentioned already. The struggle for the domination of the Krishna-Godavari basin, however, continued. In 1419, the Bahmani kingdom received a setback when Firuz Shah Bahmani was defeated by Deva Raya II. This defeat weakened Firuz’s position. He was compelled to abdicate in favor of his brother, Ahmad Shah I, who is called a saint (wali) on account of his association with the famous Sufi saint, Gesu Daraz. Ahmad Shah continued the struggle for domination of the eastern seaboard in South India. He could not forget that in the last two battles in which the Bahmani Sultan had been defeated, the ruler of Warangal had sided with Vijayanagara. In order to wreak vengeance, he invaded Warangal, defeated and killed the ruler in battle, and annexed most of its territories. To consolidate his rule over the newly acquired territories, he shifted the capital from Gulbarga to Bidar. After this, he turned his attention towards Malwa, Gondwana, and the Konkan.

    Mahmud Gawan
        The loss of Warangal to the Bahmani kingdom changed the balance of power in South India. The Bahmani kingdom gradually expanded and reached its height of power and territorial limits during the prime ministership of Mahmud Gawan. The early life of Mahmud Gawan is obscure. He was an Iranian by birth and was initially a trader. He was introduced to the Sultan and soon became a favorite, receiving the title of Malik-ud-Tujar. Soon, he became prime minister or Peshwa. For almost 20 years, Mahmud Gawan dominated the affairs of the state. He extended the Bahmani kingdom by making further annexations in the east. A deep raid into the Vijayanagara territories up to Kanchi demonstrated the strength of the Bahmani army. Mahmud Gawan’s major military contribution, however, was the overrunning of the western coastal areas, including Dabhol and Goa. The loss of these areas was a heavy blow to Vijayanagara. Control of Goa and Dabhol led to further expansion of the Bahmani overseas trade with Iran, Iraq, etc. Internal trade and manufacture also grew.

        Mahmud Gawan also tried to settle the northern frontiers of the kingdom. Since the time of Ahmad Shah I, the kingdom of Malwa, ruled by the Khalji rulers, had been contending for mastery over Gondwana, Berar, and the Konkan. In this struggle, the Bahmani sultans had sought and secured the help of the rulers of Gujarat. After a great deal of conflict, it had been agreed that Kherla in Gondwana would go to Malwa, and Berar to the Bahmani Sultan. However, the rulers of Malwa were always on the lookout for seizing Berar. Mahmud Gawan had to wage a series of bitter battles against Mahmud Khalji of Malwa over Berar. He was able to prevail due to the active help given to him by the ruler of Gujarat.

        It would, thus, be seen that the pattern of struggle in the South did not allow divisions along religious lines: political and strategic considerations and control over trade and commerce were more important causes of the conflict. Secondly, the struggle between the various states in North India and in South India did not proceed completely in isolation from each other. In the west, Malwa and Gujarat were drawn into the affairs of the Deccan; in the east, Orissa was involved in a struggle with Bengal and also cast covetous eyes on the commercially rich Coromandel coast. The Orissa rulers made deep raids into South India after 1450, with their armies reaching as far south as Madurai, and the territories of Orissa extended up to the river Krishna. Their activities further weakened the Vijayanagara empire, which was passing through a phase of internal discord following the death of Deva Raya I.

        Mahmud Gawan carried out many internal reforms. He divided the kingdom into eight provinces or tarafs. Each taraf was governed by a tarafdar. The salaries and obligations of each noble were fixed. For maintaining a contingent of 500 horses, a noble received a salary of 1,00,000 Awns per year. The salary could be paid in cash or by assigning a jagir. Those who were paid by means of a jagir were allowed expenses for the collection of land revenue. In every province, a tract of land (khalsa) was set apart for the expenses of the Sultan. Efforts were made to measure the land and fix the amount to be paid by the cultivator to the state.

        Mahmud Gawan was a great patron of the arts. He built a magnificent madrasa (college) in the capital, Bidar. This fine building, decorated with colored tiles, was three stories high and had accommodation for one thousand teachers and students who were provided clothes and food free. Some of the most famous scholars of the time from Iran and Iraq came to the madrasa at the instance of Mahmud Gawan.

        One of the most difficult problems faced by the Bahmani kingdom was strife among the nobles. The nobles were divided into the long-established Deccanis and the newcomers (Afranjis, also called Gharibs). As a newcomer, Mahmud Gawan was hard-pressed to win the confidence of the Deccanis. Though he adopted a broad policy of conciliation, the party strife could not be stopped. His opponents managed to poison the ears of the young Sultan, who had him executed in 1482. Mahmud Gawan was over 70 years old at the time. The party strife became even more intense afterward. The various governors became independent. Soon, the Bahmani kingdom was divided into five principalities: Golconda, Bijapur, Ahmadnagar, Berar, and Bidar. Of these, the kingdoms of Ahmadnagar, Bijapur, and Golconda played a leading role in Deccan politics until their absorption into the Mughal empire during the seventeenth century.

        The Bahmani kingdom acted as a cultural bridge between the north and the south. The culture that developed as a result had its own specific features, distinct from North India. These cultural traditions were continued by the successor states and also influenced the development of Mughal culture during the period.

    CLIMAX OF THE VIJAYANAGARA EMPIRE AND ITS DISINTEGRATION
        As mentioned earlier, there was confusion in the Vijayanagara Empire after the death of Deva Raya II (1446). Since the rule of primogeniture was not established in Vijayanagara, a series of civil wars broke out among various contenders to the throne. Many feudatories assumed independence in the process. The ministers became very powerful and began to exact presents and heavy taxes from the people, causing considerable distress. The authority of the Raya shrank to Karnataka and some portions of the western Andhra region. The rulers were sunk in pleasures and neglected the affairs of the state. After some time, the throne was usurped by the king’s minister, Saluva. The earlier dynasty thus came to an end. Saluva restored internal law and order and founded a new dynasty. This dynasty too soon came to an end. Ultimately, a new dynasty (called the Tuluva dynasty) was founded by Krishna Deva Raya. Krishna Deva Raya (1509-30) was the greatest figure of this dynasty. Some historians consider him to be the greatest of all the Vijayanagara rulers.

        Krishna Deva had not only to re-establish internal law and order but also had to deal with the old rivals of Vijayanagara, namely, the successor states of the Bahmani kingdom and the state of Orissa, which had usurped many Vijayanagara territories. In addition, he had to contend with the Portuguese, whose power was slowly growing. They were using their control over the seas to browbeat the smaller vassal states of Vijayanagara in the coastal areas to gain economic and political concessions. They had even offered to buy the neutrality of the Raya by promising him assistance in recovering Goa from Bijapur and giving him a monopoly in the supply of horses.

        In a series of battles lasting seven years, Krishna Deva first compelled the ruler of Orissa to restore all territories up to the river Krishna to Vijayanagara. Having thus strengthened himself, Krishna Deva renewed the old struggle for control of the Tungabhadra Doab. This led to a hostile alliance between his two main opponents, Bijapur and Orissa. Krishna Deva made grand preparations for the conflict. He opened the hostilities by overrunning Raichur and Mudkal. In the battle that followed, the Bijapur ruler was completely defeated (1520). He was pushed across the river Krishna, barely escaping with his life. In the west, the Vijayanagara armies reached Belgaum, occupied and sacked Bijapur for several days, and destroyed Gulbarga before a truce was made.

        Thus, under Krishna Deva, Vijayanagara emerged as the strongest military power in the south. However, in their eagerness to renew the old feuds, the southern powers largely ignored the danger posed by the rise of the Portuguese to their commerce. Unlike the Cholas and some of the early Vijayanagara rulers, Krishna Deva seems to have paid scant attention to the development of a navy.

        The conditions in Vijayanagara during this period are described by a number of foreign travellers. Paes, an Italian who spent several years at Krishna Deva’s court, has given a glowing account of his personality. But he remarks, “He is a great ruler and a man of much justice, but subject to sudden fits of rage.” He cherished his subjects, and his solicitude for their welfare became proverbial. He also tried to create a more centralized administration by ousting all the Nayaks from the Tungabhadra Doab and bringing it under direct administration.

        Krishna Deva was also a great builder. He built a new town near Vijayanagara and dug an enormous tank, which was also used for irrigation purposes. He was a gifted scholar of Telugu and Sanskrit. Of his many works, only one in Telugu on polity and a drama in Sanskrit are available today. His reign marked a new era in Telugu literature, where imitation of Sanskrit works gave way to independent works. He extended his patronage to Telugu, Kannada, and Tamil poets alike. Foreign travellers like Barbosa, Paes, and Nuniz speak of his efficient administration and the prosperity of the empire under his sway.

        The Vijayanagara rulers are considered great protectors of Hinduism. Under their patronage, a large number of temples, schools, and maths were built. In this period, temples became very elaborate in structure and organization; even old temples were amplified by the addition of pillared halls, pavilions, and other subordinate structures. However, speaking of the broad toleration that prevailed in the empire of Krishna Deva, Barbosa says, “The king allows such freedom that every man may come and go and live according to his own creed, without suffering any annoyance, and without enquiry whether he is a Christian, Jew, Moor, or heathen.” Barbosa also pays tribute to Krishna Deva for the justice and equity prevailing in his empire.

        After the death of Krishna Deva (1530), there was a struggle for succession among his relatives, as his sons were all minors. Ultimately, in 1543, Sadashiva Raya ascended the throne and reigned until 1567. But the real power lay in the hands of a triumvirate, with the leading person being Rama Raja. Rama Raja was able to play off the various Muslim powers against one another. He entered into a commercial treaty with the Portuguese, stopping the supply of horses to the Bijapur ruler. In a series of wars, he completely defeated the Bijapur ruler and also inflicted humiliating defeats on Golconda and Ahmadnagar. It seems that Rama Raja had no larger purpose than to maintain a balance of power favourable to Vijayanagara between these three powers. Eventually, they combined to inflict a crushing defeat on Vijayanagara at Bannihatti, near Talikota, in 1565. This is also called the Battle of Talikota or the Battle of Rakshasa-Tangadi. Rama Raja was surrounded, taken prisoner, and immediately executed. It is said that 100,000 Hindus were slain during the battle. Vijayanagara was thoroughly looted and left in ruins.

        The Battle of Bannihatti is generally considered to mark the end of the great age of Vijayanagara. Although the kingdom lingered on for almost one hundred more years, its territories continuously decreased, and the Raya no longer played a significant role in the political affairs of South India.

    State and Economy under Vijayanagara
        The concept of kingship among the Vijayanagara rulers was elevated. In his book on polity, Krishna Deva Raya advises the king: “With great care and according to your power, you should attend to the work of protecting (the good) and punishing (the wicked) without neglecting anything that you see or hear.” He also enjoined the king to “levy taxes from his people moderately.”

        In the Vijayanagara kingdom, the king was advised by a council of ministers, which consisted of the great nobles of the kingdom. The kingdom was divided into rafyes or mandalam (provinces), below which were nadu (districts), shale (sub-districts), and granza (villages).

        The Chola traditions of village self-government were considerably weakened under Vijayanagara rule. The growth of hereditary Nayakships tended to curb their freedom and initiative. The governors of the provinces were royal princes at first. Later, persons belonging to vassal ruling families and nobles were also appointed as governors. The provincial governors had a large measure of autonomy. They held their own courts, appointed their own officers, and maintained their own armies. They were allowed to issue their own coins, though of small denominations only. There was no regular term for a provincial governor; his term depended on his ability and strength. The governor had the right to impose new taxes or remit old ones. Each governor paid a fixed contribution in men and money to the central government. It had been estimated that while the income of the kingdom was 12,000,000 paradas, the central government received only half the amount.

        There were many areas in the empire under the control of subordinate rulers—those who had been defeated in war but whose kingdoms had been restored to them. In the large centrally controlled area, the king granted ameram (territory with a fixed revenue) to military chiefs. These chiefs, called palatyagar (palegar) or Nayaks, had to maintain a fixed number of foot soldiers, horses, and elephants for the service of the state. The Nayaks or Palegars also had to pay a sum of money to the central exchequer. They formed a very powerful section, and sometimes it was difficult for the government to control them. These internal weaknesses of the Vijayanagara Empire contributed to its defeat in the Battle of Bannihatti and its subsequent disintegration. Many of the Nayaks, such as those of Tanjore and Madurai, became independent from that time.

        Historians are not agreed about the economic condition of the peasantry under Vijayanagara rule, because most travellers had little knowledge about village life and thus spoke of it in very general terms. In general, it may be presumed that the economic life of the people remained more or less the same. Their houses were mostly thatched with small doors. They generally went about barefooted and wore little above the waist. People of the upper classes sometimes wore costly shoes and a silk turban on their heads but did not cover themselves above the waist. All classes of people were fond of ornaments and wore them in their ears, on their necks, and on their arms.

        We have very little idea about the share of the produce the peasants were required to pay. According to an inscription, the rates of taxes were as follows:
            •	One-third of the produce of aruvai (a type of rice) during winter.
            •	One-fourth of sesame, ragi, horsegram, etc.
            •	One-sixth of millet and other crops cultivated on dry land.

        Thus, the rate varied according to the type of crops, soil, and method of irrigation.

        In addition to the land tax, there were various other taxes, such as property tax, tax on the sale of produce, profession taxes, military contributions (in times of distress), tax on marriage, etc. The sixteenth-century traveller, Nikitin, says, “The land is overstocked with people, but those in the country are very miserable while the nobles are extremely affluent and delight in luxury.”

        Urban life grew under the Vijayanagara Empire, and trade flourished. Towns grew, many of them around temples. The temples were very large and needed supplies of foodstuffs and commodities for the distribution of prasadam to the pilgrims, service of the god, the priests, etc. The temples were rich and also took an active part in trade, both internal and overseas. There was considerable growth of towns and urbanization under Vijayanagara rule. It is in this sense that many historians consider the period of Vijayanagara rule to be a period of transition from the old to the new economy.

    THE ADVENT OF THE PORTUGUESE
        The landing of Vasco da Gama at Calicut in 1498 with two ships, guided by Gujarati pilots who had navigated the ships from the African coast to Calicut, is often considered the beginning of a new phase in which European control over the oceans began. Indian trade and traders suffered a setback, and eventually, the Europeans were able to establish their colonial rule and domination over India and most neighboring countries. However, this view has been questioned by both Western and Indian historians, particularly after World War II and the end of European political rule in the region.

        Before we assess the impact of the Portuguese on Indian society, economy, and politics, it is important to examine the factors that brought the Portuguese to India. Broadly speaking, the Portuguese arrived at a time when the European economy was growing rapidly. This growth was facilitated by the expansion of land under cultivation due to the drainage of marshes, deforestation, the introduction of improved ploughs, and more scientific crop rotation methods. These factors led to an increase in cattle production and meat supply. The growth was reflected in the rise of towns and an increase in both internal and external trade. Since Roman times, there had been a steady demand for oriental goods, including silk from China and spices and drugs from India and Southeast Asia. With economic revival, this demand increased, particularly for pepper and spices, which were used to preserve meat, as many cattle were slaughtered during the winter due to fodder shortages. Pepper was brought to the Levant, Egypt, and the Black Sea areas overland and partly by sea from India and Southeast Asia.

        With the rise of the Ottoman Turks in the early 15th century, these regions came under Turkish control. The Turks captured Constantinople in 1453, followed by Syria and Egypt. While the Turks were not opposed to trade, their monopoly on pepper negatively impacted European traders. The expansion of Turkish power towards Eastern Europe and the growth of the Turkish navy, which made the eastern Mediterranean a Turkish-controlled area, also alarmed Europeans. Venice and Genoa, the most active traders in oriental goods, were too small to resist the Turks, and Venice, in particular, quickly came to terms with them. The banner of resistance against the Turkish threat was therefore taken up by Spain and Portugal, with assistance from North Europeans and the Genoese, rivals of Venice. It was not only the Portuguese, but also all these forces, who began the search for a direct sea route to India, sparking the era of naval discoveries, including the “discovery” of America by the Genoese navigator Christopher Columbus (or its rediscovery, since Norsemen had reached America earlier, along with the Red Indians across the Bering Straits). The work of the Portuguese ruler Dom Henrique, also known as Henry the Navigator, should be viewed in this context.

        From 1418, Prince Henry sent two or three ships every year to explore the western coast of Africa and search for a sea route to India. His objectives were twofold: first, to oust the Arabs and his European rivals, the Venetians, from the rich eastern trade, and second, to counterbalance the growing power of the Turks and Arabs by converting the “heathens” of Africa and Asia to Christianity. Both objectives were pursued steadily, with the Pope granting Portugal a “perpetual” right to any lands discovered beyond Cape Nor in Africa up to India, on the condition that the people of those lands be converted to Christianity.

        In 1488, Bartholomew Diaz rounded the Cape of Good Hope, paving the way for direct trade links between Europe and India. These long sea voyages were made possible by remarkable inventions, such as the mariner’s compass and the astrolabe, which allowed navigators to determine the height of celestial bodies. The compass was known to the Chinese centuries earlier, though not widely used, while the astrolabe was commonly used by Arabs, Indians, and others. While European ships were not superior to those used in Asia, such as the Chinese junks, the Europeans displayed a new spirit of daring and enterprise. This spirit was fueled by the revival of trade and commerce from the 13th century, leading to intense rivalry among European states. The Renaissance, a new intellectual movement, encouraged independent investigation, rather than relying on traditional religious teachings. These developments facilitated the rapid assimilation and improvement of foreign inventions like gunpowder, printing, and the telescope, as well as advancements in metallurgy, which helped produce better-quality guns.

        Vasco da Gama landed at Calicut in 1498, with Gujarati pilots on board. The strong colony of Arab merchants there was hostile, but the Zamorin welcomed the Portuguese and allowed them to take pepper, drugs, and other goods on board. In Portugal, the goods brought by Gama were valued at sixty times the cost of the entire expedition. Despite this, direct trade between India and Europe grew slowly. One reason for this was the monopoly exercised by the Portuguese government. From the outset, the Portuguese rulers were determined to treat the eastern trade as a royal monopoly, excluding not only rival nations in Europe and Asia, but also private Portuguese traders.

        Alarmed by the growing power of the Portuguese, the Sultan of Egypt sent a fleet towards India. This fleet was joined by ships from the ruler of Gujarat. After an initial victory in which the Portuguese governor’s son, Don Almeida, was killed, the combined fleet was defeated by the Portuguese in 1509. This victory made the Portuguese navy supreme in the Indian Ocean, allowing them to extend their operations to the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea.

        Shortly after, Albuquerque succeeded as the governor of Portuguese possessions in the East. He embarked on a policy of establishing forts at strategic locations in Asia and Africa, to be supported by a strong navy. He argued that a dominion founded solely on a navy could not last, and that fortifications were essential for trade and friendly relations.

        Albuquerque’s new policy began with the capture of Goa from Bijapur in 1510. Goa’s excellent harbor and strategic location made it the ideal base for Portuguese commercial and political activities in the East. From Goa, the Portuguese were able to extend their influence to the Gujarat sea-ports, blockading and sacking Bijapur’s sea trade.

        From Goa, the Portuguese further strengthened their position by establishing forts at Colombo in Sri Lanka, Achin in Sumatra, and at the Malacca port, which controlled the narrow gulf between the Malay Peninsula and Sumatra. They also established a station at the island of Socotra at the mouth of the Red Sea. Although they failed to capture Aden, they forced the ruler of Ormuz, who controlled the Persian Gulf entrance, to allow them to establish a fort there.

        However, the success of the Portuguese was more apparent than real. They faced external challenges from the Turks, who were sometimes joined by Arabs and Indian powers. After conquering Syria, Egypt, and Arabia, the Turks moved into Eastern Europe and, in 1529, threatened Vienna. The growth of Turkish power in the Red Sea and Persian Gulf seemed to signal a conflict between the Turks and Portuguese for control over the western part of the Indian Ocean.

        In response to the growing Portuguese threat to Gujarat’s trade and coastal areas, the Sultan of Gujarat sent an embassy to the Ottoman ruler, congratulating him on his victories and seeking support. The Ottomans, in turn, expressed a desire to combat the Portuguese. From this point onward, continuous exchanges of embassies and letters occurred between the two powers. The Turks ousted the Portuguese from the Red Sea, and in 1529 a strong fleet under Sulaiman Rais was dispatched to aid Bahadur Shah, the ruler of Gujarat.

        In 1531, after intrigues with local officials, the Portuguese attacked Daman and Diu, but the Ottoman commander, Rumi Khan, repulsed the attack. The Portuguese, however, built a fort at Chaul, further down the coast.

        Before the Gujarat-Turkish alliance could be solidified, the Mughals presented a greater threat to Gujarat. Humayun attacked Gujarat, and in response, Bahadur Shah granted the Portuguese the island of Bassein. A defensive-offensive alliance against the Mughals was also established, allowing the Portuguese to build a fort at Diu. This allowed the Portuguese to establish a foothold in Gujarat.

        Soon after, Bahadur Shah regretted his concessions to the Portuguese. Following the expulsion of the Mughals from Gujarat, he again appealed to the Ottoman Sultan for help and sought to limit Portuguese encroachments at Diu. During negotiations, Bahadur Shah, aboard one of the governor’s ships, suspected treachery. A scuffle ensued, during which the Portuguese governor was killed and Bahadur Shah drowned while swimming ashore in 1536.

        Although the Ottoman sultans claimed to be champions of Islam and opponents of the Portuguese, they did not seriously contest Portuguese control in the Persian Gulf and beyond. The Turkish navy dominated the eastern Mediterranean, and they made raids beyond Gibraltar.

        The Turks made their most significant naval attempt against the Portuguese in Indian waters in 1536. Their fleet consisted of 45 galleons with 20,000 men, including 7,000 land soldiers. The fleet, led by Sulaiman Pasha, a trusted Ottoman official, besieged Diu in 1538. However, the Turkish admiral’s arrogance led the Sultan of Gujarat to withdraw his support, and after two months, the fleet retired following news of a formidable Portuguese armada.

        The Turkish threat to the Portuguese persisted for another two decades. In 1551, Peri Rais, assisted by the Zamorin of Calicut, attacked the Portuguese forts at Muscat and Ormuz. Meanwhile, the Portuguese strengthened their position by securing Daman from its ruler. A final Ottoman expedition was sent under Ali Rais in 1554. The failure of these expeditions resulted in a final change in the Turkish attitude. In 1566, the Portuguese and the Ottomans came to an agreement to share the spice and Indian trade and avoid conflict in the Arabian Sea. The Ottomans shifted their interest once again to Europe and came to an agreement with the Portuguese to divide the oriental trade between them. This precluded their alliance with the rising Mughal power against the Portuguese. However, it also had economic consequences, as we shall see.

    Portuguese Impact on the Indian Trade, Society, and Politics
        From the beginning, the Portuguese could neither adequately police the vast expanse of the Indian Ocean nor control the trade or the traders there. All they could attempt to do was monopolize certain goods and tax others. Thus, trade in pepper, arms and ammunition, and war horses was declared a royal monopoly. No nation, not even Portuguese private traders, were allowed to engage in the trade of these goods. Ships engaged in the trade of other commodities had to take a permit from the Portuguese officials. The Portuguese also attempted to force all ships going to the East or to Africa to pass by Goa and pay customs duty there.

        To enforce these rules, the Portuguese arrogated to themselves the right to search any ship suspected of engaging in ‘contraband’ trade. Ships that refused to be searched could be treated as prizes of war and either sunk or captured, with the men and women aboard treated as slaves. This led to continuous friction. The Portuguese soon found that they stood to lose more on land than they gained at sea by such practices, which were quite contrary to the practices and traditions of open trade in Asian waters. True, many Arab and Indian ships began to carry cannons and soldiers, but it was more a safeguard against sea pirates that infested the Malabar and Arab coasts.

        The Portuguese were hardly able to change the established pattern of Asian trade networks. The Gujarati and Arab traders continued to dominate some of the most lucrative Asian trade, such as the trade in Indian textiles, supplemented by rice and sugar, in exchange for spices from the Southeast, gold and horses from West Asia, and silk and porcelain from China. The Portuguese were not even able to monopolize the pepper and spice trade to Europe, except for a couple of decades at the outset. By the end of the sixteenth century, the supply of pepper to the Levant and Egyptian markets, both overland and by the Red Sea, was as large as it had been earlier. This was because the great Asian empires, the Mughal and the Safavid, were able to promote and safeguard overland trade, and also because the Gujaratis were able to arrange a new supply route from Achin in Sumatra to Egypt via Lakshadweep and the Red Sea, where the Portuguese navy could not operate.

        Nor were the Portuguese able to develop Goa as the dominant center of the Asian trade, eclipsing Cambay and later Surat in Gujarat. However, they adversely affected the Malabar trade and the sea trade from Bengal, which they preyed upon from Chittagong.

        The Portuguese, however, opened up India’s trade with Japan, from which copper and silver were obtained. They also opened up India’s trade with the Philippines. From the Philippines, the Portuguese carried Indian textiles to South America and brought back silver in exchange. They demonstrated how naval power could be used to harass and hamper the trade of even such a well-developed country as India, as well as to open new lines of trade.

        The Portuguese could not act as a bridge for transmitting to India the science and technology that had grown in Europe since the Renaissance. This was partly because the Portuguese were themselves not as deeply affected by the Renaissance as Italy and Northern Europe. Later, with the growth of a Catholic religious reaction led by the Jesuits, they even set their face against the new science. However, they did help transmit a number of agricultural products from Central America, such as potatoes, tobacco, maize, peanuts, etc. These became widespread only gradually.

        The defeat of Vijayanagara at Banihatti in 1565 emboldened the Deccani states to make a concerted effort to dislodge the Portuguese from the Deccan coast. As long as Vijayanagara had threatened Bijapur in the south, peace with the Portuguese was essential since they controlled the horse trade, and hostilities with them would have meant a diversion of the trade in favor of Vijayanagara. In 1570, Ali Adil Shah, the Sultan of Bijapur, entered into an agreement with the Sultan of Ahmadnagar. The Zamorin of Calicut was also drawn into the alliance. The allies decided to attack the Portuguese positions in their own dominions. Adil Shah personally led the attack against Goa, while Nizam Shah besieged Chaul. But once again, the Portuguese defense, backed up by their navy, proved to be too strong. Thus, the Portuguese remained masters of the Indian seas and the Deccan coast.


- Struggle for Empire in North India—I (Circa 1400-1525)
    The growing weakness of the Delhi Sultanate, and the attack of Timur on Delhi in 1398, followed by the flight of the Tughlaq king from his capital, emboldened a number of provincial governors and autonomous rulers to declare their independence. Apart from the Deccan states, Bengal in the east, and Sindh and Multan in the west were among the first to break away from Delhi. Soon, the governors of Gujarat, Malwa, and Jaunpur (in eastern Uttar Pradesh) also declared themselves independent. With the expulsion of the Muslim governor from Ajmer, the various states of Rajputana asserted their independence.

    Gradually, a definite pattern of balance of power emerged between the states belonging to the various regions. In the west, Gujarat, Malwa, and Mewar balanced and checked the growth of each other’s power. Bengal was checked by the Gajapati rulers of Orissa, as well as by Jaunpur. The rise of the power of the Lodis in Delhi from about the middle of the fifteenth century resulted in a long-drawn-out tussle between them and the rulers of Jaunpur for the mastery of the Ganga-Yamuna valley. The situation began to change with the absorption of Jaunpur by the Lodis towards the end of the fifteenth century. Following this victory, the Lodis began to expand their power in eastern Rajasthan and Malwa. Malwa started disintegrating at this time due to internal factors, thereby sharpening the rivalry between Gujarat, Mewar, and the Lodis. It appeared that the victor in this contest would dominate the entire north India. Thus, the struggle for the domination of Malwa was the cockpit for the struggle for the mastery of north India. It was this heightened rivalry which perhaps prompted Rana Sanga to invite Babur in the hope that the destruction of the power of the Lodis would leave Mewar as the strongest power in the field.

    Eastern India—Bengal, Assam, and Orissa
        As we have seen above, Bengal had frequently become independent of the control of Delhi due to its distance, climate, and the fact that much of its communication depended upon waterways, with which the Turkish rulers were unfamiliar. Due to the preoccupation of Muhammad Tughlaq with rebellions in various quarters, Bengal again broke away from Delhi in 1338. Four years later, one of the nobles, Ilyas Khan, captured Lakhnauti and Sonargaon, and ascended the throne under the title Sultan Shamsuddin Ilyas Khan. He extended his dominions in the west, from Tirhut to Champaran and Gorakhpur, and finally up to Banaras. This forced Firuz Tughlaq to undertake a campaign against him. Marching through Champaran and Gorakhpur, the territories newly acquired by Ilyas, Firuz Tughlaq occupied the Bengali capital Pandua and forced Ilyas to seek shelter in the strong fort of Ekdala. After a siege of two months, Firuz tempted Ilyas out of the fort by feigning flight. The Bengali forces were defeated, but Ilyas once again retreated into Ekdala. Finally, a treaty of friendship was concluded by which the river Kosi in Bihar was fixed as the boundary between the two kingdoms. Though Ilyas exchanged regular gifts with Firuz, he was in no way subordinate to him. Friendly relations with Delhi enabled Ilyas to extend his control over the kingdom of Kamrup (in modern Assam).

        Ilyas Shah was a popular ruler and had many achievements to his credit. When Firuz was at Pandua, he tried to win over the inhabitants of the city to his side by giving liberal grants of land to the nobles, the clergy, and other deserving people. His attempts failed. The popularity of Ilyas might have been one of the reasons for the failure of Firuz against him.

        Firuz Tughlaq invaded Bengal a second time when Ilyas died and his son, Sikandar, succeeded to the throne. Sikandar followed the tactics of his father and retreated to Ekdala. Firuz failed, once again, to capture it, and had to beat a retreat. After this, Bengal was left alone for about 200 years and was not invaded again until after the Mughals had established their power at Delhi. It was overrun by Sher Shah in 1538. During this period, a number of dynasties flourished in Bengal. The frequent changes of dynasties did not, however, disturb the even tenor of the lives of the common people.

        The most famous sultan in the dynasty of Ilyas Shah was Ghiyasuddin Azam Shah (1389-1409). He was known for his love of justice. It is said that he once accidentally killed the son of a widow who complained to the qazī. The sultan, when summoned to the court, humbly appeared and paid the fine imposed by the qazī. At the end of the trial, the sultan told the qazī that if he had failed to do his duty, he would have had him beheaded.

        Azam Shah had close relations with the famous learned men of his times, including the famous Persian poet, Hafiz of Shiraz. He re-established friendly relations with the Chinese. The Chinese emperor received his envoy cordially and, in 1409, sent his own envoy with presents to the sultan and his wife, along with a request to send Buddhist monks to China. This was accordingly done. Incidentally, this shows that Buddhism had not died completely in Bengal until then.

        The revival of contact with China helped in the growth of the overseas trade of Bengal. The Chittagong port became a flourishing port for trade with China and for the re-export of Chinese goods to other parts of the world.

        During this period, there was a brief spell of Hindu rule under Raja Ganesh. However, his sons preferred to rule as Muslims.

        The sultans of Bengal adorned their capitals, Pandua and Gaur, with magnificent buildings. These had a style of their own, distinct from the style which had developed in Delhi. The materials used were both stone and brick. The sultans also patronized the Bengali language. The celebrated poet Maladhar Basu, compiler of Sn-Krishna-Vijaya, was patronized by the sultans and was granted the title of Gunaraja Khan. His son was honored with the title of Satyaraja Khan. But the most significant period for the growth of the Bengali language was the rule of Alauddin Hussain (1493-1519). Some of the famous Bengali writers of the time flourished under his rule.

        A brilliant period began under the enlightened rule of Alauddin Hussain. The sultan restored law and order and adopted a liberal policy by offering high offices to the Hindus. Thus, his wazir was a talented Hindu. The chief physician, the chief of the bodyguard, and the master of the mint were also Hindus. The two famous brothers who were celebrated as pious Vaishnavas, Rupa and Sanatan, held high posts, one of them being the sultan’s private secretary. The sultan is also said to have shown great respect to the famous Vaishnavite saint, Chaitanya.

        Since the time of Muhammad bin Bakhtiyar Khalji, the Muslim rulers of Bengal had tried to bring the Brahmaputra valley in modern Assam under their control, but had to suffer a series of disastrous defeats in this region, which was little known to them. The independent sultans of Bengal tried to follow in the footsteps of their predecessors. There were two warring kingdoms in north Bengal and Assam at that time. Kamata (called Kamrup by the writers of the time) was in the west, and the Ahom kingdom was in the east. The Ahoms, a Mongoloid tribe from north Burma, had succeeded in establishing a powerful kingdom in the thirteenth century, and had become Hinduized in the course of time. The name Assam is derived from them.

        Ilyas Shah invaded Kamta and, it seems, penetrated up to Gauliati. However, he could not hold the area, and the river Karatoya was accepted as the northeast boundary of Bengal. Plundering raids into Kamta by some of the successors of Ilyas Shah did not change the situation. The rulers of Kamta were gradually able to recover many of the areas on the eastern bank of the Karatoya. They also fought against the Ahoms. By alienating both their neighbors, they sealed their doom. An attack by Alauddin Hussain Shah, which was supported by the Ahoms, led to the destruction of the city of Kamtapur (in modern Cooch Bihar), and the annexation of the kingdom to Bengal. The sultan appointed one of his sons as governor of the area. A colony of Afghans was planted in the area. A subsequent attack on the Ahom kingdom, probably by Nusrat Shah, the son of Alauddin Hussain, was unsuccessful and was repulsed with considerable losses. The eastern Brahmaputra valley was at this time under Suhungmung, who is considered the greatest of the Ahom rulers. He changed his name to Svarga Narayana. This was an index of the rapid Hinduization of the Ahoms. He not only repulsed the Muslim attack, but also extended his kingdom in all directions. The Vaishnavite reformer, Shankaradeva, belonged to his time and played an important role in the spread of Vaishnavism in the area.

        The sultans of Bengal also tried to bring Chittagong and a part of Arakan under their control. Sultan Hussain Shah not only wrested Chittagong from the Arakan king but also conquered Tipperah from its ruler.

        The rulers of Bengal had also to contend with Orissa. During the period of the Sultanate rule over Bengal, the Ganga rulers of Orissa had aided Radha (south Bengal), and even made an attempt at the conquest of Lakhnauti. These attacks had been repulsed, but the rulers of Orissa were powerful enough not to allow the governor of Bengal to penetrate into Orissa. It was the rulers of the Ganga dynasty who built the famous Puri temple, and the Sun temple (Konark). It was only after 1338 that the independent ruler of Bengal, Ilyas Shah, raided Jajnagar (Orissa). It is said that overcoming all opposition, he advanced up to the Chilka Lake and returned with a rich booty, including a number of elephants. A couple of years later, in 1360, while returning from his Bengal campaign, Firuz Tughlaq also raided Orissa. He occupied the capital city, massacred a large number of people, and desecrated the Jagannatha temple of Puri. These two raids destroyed the prestige of the Ganga dynasty. In due course, a new dynasty, called the Gajapati dynasty, came to the fore. The Gajapati rule marks a brilliant phase in Orissa’s history. The rulers were great builders and warriors. The Gajapati rulers were mainly instrumental in extending their rule in the south towards Karnataka. As we have seen, this brought them into conflict with Vijayanagara, the Reddis, and the Bahmani sultans. Perhaps, one reason why the Gajapati rulers preferred aggrandizement in the south was their feeling that the sultans of Bengal were too strong to be easily dislodged from the Bengal-Orissa border. But the Orissa rulers could not hold on to their southern conquests for any length of time due to the power and capabilities of the Vijayanagara and Bahmani rulers.

        In Bengal, the Orissa frontier at this time was the river Saraswati, which then carried much of the waters of the Ganga. Thus, a large part of Midnapore district and part of the Hugli district were included in Orissa territories. There is some evidence that the Orissa rulers tried to extend their control up to Bhagirathi but were compelled to retreat. Some of the sultans of Bengal, including Alauddin Hussain Shah, made raids into Orissa, which extended up to Puri and Cuttack.

        Intermittent fighting also went on at the frontier. However, the rulers of Bengal were not able to dislodge the Orissan rulers from their frontiers, or to gain any territory beyond the river Saraswati. That the Orissan rulers were able to engage successfully in battles at the same time in such far-flung areas as Bengal and Karnataka testifies to their strength and prowess.

    WESTERN INDIA—GUJARAT, Malwa, AND Mewar
        On account of the excellence of its handicrafts, flourishing seaports, and the richness of its soil, Gujarat was one of the wealthiest provinces of the Delhi Sultanate. Under Firuz Tughlaq, Gujarat had a benevolent governor who, according to Ferishta, “encouraged the Hindu religion and thus promoted rather than suppressed the worship of idols.” He was succeeded by Zafar Khan, whose father, Sadharan, was a Rajput who had converted to Islam and had given his sister in marriage to Firuz Tughlaq. After Timur’s invasion of Delhi, both Gujarat and Malwa became independent in all but name. However, it was not until 1407 that Zafar Khan formally proclaimed himself ruler, adopting the title Muzaffar Shah.

        The real founder of the kingdom of Gujarat was Ahmad Shah I (1411–43), the grandson of Muzaffar Shah. During his long reign, he brought the nobility under control, settled the administration, and expanded and consolidated the kingdom. He moved the capital from Patan to the newly founded city of Ahmedabad, which he established in 1413. Ahmad Shah was a great builder, enhancing the city with magnificent palaces, bazaars, mosques, and madrasas. He drew on the rich architectural traditions of the Jains in Gujarat, creating a style distinctly different from that of Delhi. Some of its features include slender turrets, exquisite stone-carving, and highly ornate brackets. The Jama Masjid in Ahmedabad and the Tin Darwaza are fine examples of the architectural style during his reign.

        Ahmad Shah attempted to extend his control over the Rajput states in the Saurashtra region and those located along the Gujarat-Rajasthan border. In Saurashtra, he defeated and captured the strong fort of Girnar but restored it to the raja on the condition that he pay tribute. He then attacked Sidhpur, the famous Hindu pilgrimage center, and leveled many of its beautiful temples. Ahmad Shah imposed the jizyah tax on the Hindus in Gujarat, a tax that had not been levied on them earlier. While many medieval historians hailed Ahmad Shah as a great enemy of the infidels, modern historians often regard him as a bigot. However, the truth seems more complex. While Ahmad Shah acted as a bigot in ordering the destruction of Hindu temples, he did not hesitate to appoint Hindus in his government. Manik Chand and Motichand, from the Bania or trader community, served as ministers under him. Ahmad Shah was so strict in justice that he had his own son-in-law executed in the marketplace for a murder he had committed. Although he fought the Hindu rulers, he also fought against Muslim rulers, particularly those of Malwa. He subordinated the powerful fort of Idar and brought the Rajput states of Jhalawar, Bundi, and Dungarpur under his control.

        From the beginning, Gujarat and Malwa were bitter rivals and often found themselves on opposite sides of conflicts. Muzaffar Shah had defeated and imprisoned Hushang Shah, the ruler of Malwa. However, after struggling to control Malwa, he eventually released Hushang Shah after a few years and reinstated him. This did not heal the rift; instead, it made the rulers of Malwa even more wary of Gujarat’s power. They constantly sought to weaken Gujarat by supporting disaffected elements, such as rebel nobles or Hindu rajas at war with the Gujarat ruler. The rulers of Gujarat tried to counter this by attempting to install their own nominee on the throne of Malwa. This bitter rivalry weakened both kingdoms and made it impossible for them to play a larger role in the politics of north India.

        Mahmud Begarha
            The successors of Ahmad Shah continued his policy of expansion and consolidation. The most famous sultan of Gujarat was Mahmud Begarha, who ruled from 1459 to 1511. He was called Begarha because he captured two of the most powerful forts: Girnar in Saurashtra (now called Junagadh) and Champaner in southern Gujarat. The ruler of Girnar had been paying tribute regularly, but Mahmud Begarha decided to annex the kingdom as part of his policy to bring Saurashtra fully under control. Saurashtra was a rich and prosperous region with fertile tracts and flourishing ports. Unfortunately, it was also plagued by robbers and sea pirates who targeted trade and shipping. The powerful fort of Girnar was considered suitable not only for administering Saurashtra but also as a base for operations against Sindh.

            Mahmud Begarha besieged Girnar with a large force. Though the raja had only a few guns in the fort, he resisted gallantly, but to no avail. It is said that the conquest of this seemingly inaccessible fort was due to treason. The ruler of Girnar had forcibly taken the wife of his kamdar (minister), who secretly schemed for his downfall. After the fort fell, the raja embraced Islam and entered the service of the sultan. Mahmud Begarha founded a new town at the foot of the hill called Mustafabad. He built many lofty buildings there and instructed his nobles to do the same, making it the second capital of Gujarat.

            Later in his reign, Mahmud sacked Dwarka, claiming it harbored pirates who preyed on pilgrim traffic to Mecca. However, the campaign also served to destroy the famous Hindu temples there.

            The fort of Champaner was strategically located for Mahmud’s plans to bring Khandesh and Malwa under his control. The ruler, though a feudatory of Gujarat, had close relations with the sultan of Malwa. Champaner fell in 1454 after the valiant raja and his followers, deprived of help, performed the jausar ceremony and fought to the last man. Mahmud Begarha constructed a new town near Champaner, called Muhammadabad. He laid out many fine gardens and made it his principal residence.

            Champaner is now in ruins, but the Jama Masjid still stands, attracting attention. It has a covered courtyard, and many Jain architectural principles are incorporated. The stonework in the other buildings constructed during this period is so fine that it can only be compared to the work of goldsmiths.

            Mahmud Begarha also had to deal with the Portuguese, who were interfering with Gujarat’s trade with West Asia. He joined forces with the ruler of Egypt to counter Portuguese naval power, but was unsuccessful.

            During Mahmud Begarha’s long and peaceful reign, trade and commerce prospered. He constructed many caravanserais and inns for the comfort of travelers. Merchants were pleased because the roads were safe for traffic.

            Though Mahmud Begarha never received formal education, he gained considerable knowledge by associating with learned men. Many works were translated from Arabic into Persian during his reign. His court poet was Udayaraja, who composed in Sanskrit.

            Mahmud Begarha had a striking appearance. He had a flowing beard that reached his waist, and his moustache was so long that he tied it over his head. According to a traveler, Barbosa, Mahmud had been nourished on poison since childhood, so if a fly settled on his hand, it would swell and immediately die.

            Mahmud was also famous for his voracious appetite. It is said that for breakfast, he consumed a cup of honey, a cup of butter, and 100 to 150 plantains. He ate 10 to 15 kilos of food a day, and plates of meat patties (samosas) were placed on both sides of his pillow at night in case he became hungry.

            Under Mahmud Begarha, the Gujarat kingdom reached its maximum size and became one of the most powerful and well-administered states in the country. Later, it was powerful enough to pose a serious challenge to the Mughal ruler, Humayun.

        Malwa
            The state of Malwa was situated on the high plateau between the Narmada and Tapti rivers. It controlled the trunk routes between Gujarat and northern India, as well as those between north and south India.

            As long as Malwa remained strong, it acted as a barrier to the ambitions of Gujarat, Mewar, the Bahmanis, and the Lodi sultans of Delhi. The geopolitical situation in northern India was such that if any of the powerful states in the region could extend its control over Malwa, it would be well on its way to dominating the entire northern part of India.

            During the fifteenth century, the kingdom of Malwa reached the height of its glory. The capital was shifted from Dhar to Mandu, a location that was highly defensible and possessed natural beauty. Here, the rulers of Malwa constructed a large number of buildings, the ruins of which are still impressive today. Unlike the Gujarat style of architecture, Mandu architecture was massive, made even more so by using a lofty plinth for the buildings. The large-scale use of colored and glazed tiles provided variety to the structures. The best-known among them are the Jama Masjid, Hindola Mahal, and Jahaz Mahal.

            From the beginning, the kingdom of Malwa was torn by internal dissensions. The struggle for succession between different contenders for the throne was accompanied by fighting between various groups of nobles for power and profit. The neighboring states of Gujarat and Mewar were always ready to take advantage of this factionalism for their own benefit.

            One of the early rulers of Malwa, Hushang Shah, adopted a broad policy of religious toleration. Many Rajputs were encouraged to settle in Malwa. Two of the elder brothers of Rana Mokal of Mewar were granted jagirs in Malwa. The inscription of the Lalitpur temple, built during this period, suggests that no restrictions were placed on the construction of temples. Hushang Shah also extended his patronage to the Jains, who were the principal merchants and bankers of the area. Nardeva Soni, a successful merchant, became the treasurer and one of Hushang Shah’s advisers.

            However, not all rulers of Malwa were equally tolerant. Mahmud Khalji (1436–69), considered the most powerful of the Malwa rulers, destroyed many temples during his struggles with Rana Kumbha of Mewar and the neighboring Hindu rajas. While this was reprehensible and a setback from the policy of broad toleration that had gradually developed under the Delhi Sultanate, it was not part of a general policy of temple destruction.

            Mahmud Khalji was a restless and ambitious monarch. He fought with almost all his neighbors—the ruler of Gujarat, the rajas of Gondwana and Orissa, the Bahmani sultans, and even the sultan of Delhi. However, his principal efforts were focused on overrunning South Rajputana and subduing Mewar.

        Mewar
            The rise of Mewar during the fifteenth century was an important factor in the political life of northern India. After being ousted from Ajmer, the Chauhans shifted to Ranthambhor and established a powerful state. With the conquest of Ranthambhor by Alauddin Khalji, the power of the Chauhans in Rajputana finally came to an end. From its ruins, a number of new states emerged. The state of Marwar, with its capital at Jodhpur (founded in 1465), was one of these. Another important state in the region was the Muslim principality of Nagaur. Ajmer, which had been the seat of power for Muslim governors, changed hands several times and became a point of contention among the rising Rajput states. The mastery of eastern Rajputana was also disputed, with the ruler of Delhi being deeply interested in the region.

            The early history of the state of Mewar is obscure. The virtual founder of Mewar is said to be Bapa Rawal of the Guhilot clan, who migrated from Gujarat in the seventh century and dominated the southwestern part of Rajasthan. The Guhilots ruled from Chittor until the time of Ratan Singh, who was ousted by Alauddin Khalji. Chittor then passed into the hands of the Sisodiyas, who had been feudatories of the Guhilots. During the late fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries, Rao Lakha and Mokal made Mewar the most powerful state in Rajasthan. The ruler who elevated it to the status of a dominant power was Rana Kumbha (1433–68). After consolidating his position by defeating internal rivals, Kumbha focused on the conquest of Bundi, Kotah, and Daungarpur on the Gujarat border. Kotah had previously been loyal to Malwa, and Daungarpur to Gujarat. This brought him into direct conflict with both these kingdoms. There were also other reasons for the conflict. The Khan of Nagaur, whom Rana Kumbha had attacked, appealed for help to the ruler of Gujarat. Additionally, Rana Kumbha had sheltered a rival of Mahmud Khalji and even attempted to install him on the Malwa throne. In retaliation, Mahmud Khalji gave refuge to some of the Rana’s rivals, such as his brother Mokal.

            The conflicts with Gujarat and Malwa occupied Kumbha throughout his reign. He also had to contend with the Rathors of Marwar. Marwar, which had been under Mewar’s occupation, soon gained independence under the leadership of Rao Jodha.

            Although severely pressed from all sides, Rana Kumbha was largely able to maintain his position in Mewar. Kumbhalgarh was besieged a couple of times by Gujarat forces, while Mahmud Khalji managed to raid as far as Ajmer and install his own governor there. Nevertheless, the Rana was able to repel these attacks and retain most of his conquests, except for some outlying areas like Ranthambhor. Rana Kumbha’s ability to defend against two powerful states was a significant achievement.

            Kumbha was a patron of learned men and was himself a scholar. He composed several books, some of which are still extant. The ruins of his palace and the Victory Tower (Kirtistambha) at Chittor, which he built, show that he was also an enthusiastic builder. He dug several lakes and reservoirs for irrigation, and the temples built during his reign demonstrate that the art of stone-cutting and sculpture was still at a high level.

            Kumbha was murdered by his son, Uda, in a bid to gain the throne. Though Uda was soon ousted, he left behind a legacy of conflict. After a long fratricidal struggle, Rana Sanga, a grandson of Kumbha, ascended the throne of Mewar in 1508. The most important development between Kumbha’s death and the rise of Sanga was the rapid internal disintegration of Malwa. The ruler, Mahmud II, had fallen out with Medini Rai, the powerful Rajput leader of eastern Malwa who had helped him gain the throne. Mahmud II appealed to Gujarat for help, while Medini Rai sought assistance from Rana Sanga. In a battle in 1517, Rana Sanga defeated Mahmud II and took him prisoner to Chittor. It is said that he released him after six months, keeping one of Mahmud’s sons as a hostage. Eastern Malwa, including Chanderi, came under Rana Sanga’s control.

            The developments in Malwa alarmed the Lodi rulers of Delhi, who were closely monitoring the situation. Ibrahim Lodi of Delhi invaded Mewar but suffered a defeat at the hands of Rana Sanga at Khatoli. Ibrahim Lodi withdrew to consolidate his internal position. Meanwhile, Babur was approaching the gates of India.

            By 1525, the political situation in northern India was rapidly changing, and a decisive conflict for supremacy seemed inevitable.

    Northwest and North India – The Sharqis, The Lost Sultans, and Kashmir
        As we have seen, after the invasion of Timur, Sultan Mahmud Tughlaq fled from Delhi and took shelter first in Gujarat and then in Malwa. By the time he decided to return, the prestige of the throne of Delhi had been shattered. In the neighbourhood of Delhi itself, ambitious nobles and zamindars asserted their independence.

        Among the first to assert independence in the Ganga valley was Malik Sarwar, a prominent noble during the reign of Firuz Tughlaq. Malik Sarwar had served as the wazir for some time and was later nominated to the eastern areas with the title Matik-ws-Sharq (Lord of the East). His successors came to be called the Sharqis after his title. The Sharqi sultans fixed their capital at Jaunpur (in eastern Uttar Pradesh), which they beautified with magnificent palaces, mosques, and mausoleums. Only a few of these mosques and mausoleums survive today. They show that the Sharqi sultans did not merely copy the Delhi style of architecture but created a magnificent style of their own, marked by lofty gates and huge arches.

        The Sharqi sultans were great patrons of learning and culture. Poets, men of letters, scholars, and saints assembled at Jaunpur and shed lustre on it. In time, Jaunpur came to be known as the “Shiraz of the East.” Malik Muhammad Jaisi, the author of the well-known Hindi work Padmavat, lived at Jaunpur.

        The Sharqi Sultanate lasted for less than a century. At its height, it extended from Aligarh in western Uttar Pradesh to Darbhanga in north Bihar, and from the boundary of Nepal in the north to Bundelkhand in the south. The Sharqi rulers were eager to conquer Delhi, but they were not successful. With the establishment of the Lodis in Delhi towards the middle of the fifteenth century, the Sharqi rulers were gradually put on the defensive. They lost most of the areas in western Uttar Pradesh and exhausted themselves in a series of bitter but futile assaults on Delhi. At length, in 1484, Bahlul Lodi, the ruler of Delhi, occupied Jaunpur and annexed the Sharqi kingdom. The Sharqi king lived as an exile in Chunar for some time and died broken-hearted after repeated failures in regaining his kingdom.

        The Sharqi rulers maintained law and order over a large tract following the collapse of the government in Delhi. They successfully prevented the rulers of Bengal from extending their control over eastern Uttar Pradesh. Above all, they established a cultural tradition that continued long after the downfall of the Sharqis.

        After the Timurid invasion, a new dynasty called the Saiyid dynasty arose in Delhi. A number of Afghan sardars established themselves in the Punjab. The most important of these was Bahlul Lodi, who had been granted the iqta of Sirhind. Bahlul Lodi checked the growing power of the Khokhars, a fierce, warlike tribe living in the Salt Ranges. Soon, he dominated the entire Punjab. Called in to help the ruler of Delhi against an impending attack by the ruler of Mahwa, Bahlul stayed on. Before long, his men took control of Delhi. Bahlul formally crowned himself in 1451 when the ruler of Delhi died in exile, thus ending the Saiyid dynasty.

        The Lodis dominated the upper Ganga valley and the Punjab from the middle of the fifteenth century. Unlike the earlier Delhi rulers who were “Turks,” the Lodis were Afghans. Although Afghans formed a large group in the army of the Delhi Sultanate, very few Afghan nobles had been accorded important positions. The growing importance of the Afghans in north India was shown by the rise of Afghan rule in Malwa. In the south, they held important positions in the Bahmani kingdom.

        Bahlul Lodi’s energies were mainly occupied with his contest against the Sharqi rulers. Finding himself in a weak position, Bahlul invited the Afghans of Roh to come to India so that “they will get rid of the ignominy of poverty and I shall gain ascendancy.” The Afghan historian Abbas Sarwani adds, “On receipt of these farmans, the Afghans of Roh came like locusts to join the service of Sultan Bahlul.”

        This may be an exaggeration. However, the incursion of a large number of Afghans not only enabled Bahlul to defeat the Sharqis, but it also changed the complexion of Muslim society in India, making the Afghans a significant element in both south and north India.

        The most important Lodi sultan was Sikandar Lodi (1489-1517). A contemporary of Mahmud Begarha of Gujarat and Rana Sanga of Mewar, Sikandar Lodi geared the kingdom of Delhi for the coming struggle with these states. He tried to subdue the Afghan sardars, who had a strong sense of tribal independence and were not accustomed to look upon the sultan as more than a first among equals. Sikandar made the nobles stand before him to impress them with his superior status. When a royal order was sent, all the nobles had to come out of the town to receive it with due honour. All those who held jagirs had to submit accounts regularly. Drastic punishments were given to those who embezzled money or were corrupt. Sikandar Lodi had limited success in his efforts to control the nobles. Upon his death, Bahlul Lodi had divided the kingdom among his sons and relations. Though Sikandar had been able to undo this after a hard struggle, the idea of a partition of the empire among the sons of the ruler persisted among the Afghans.

        Sikandar Lodi was able to establish efficient administration in his kingdom. He laid great emphasis on justice, and all the highways of the empire were made safe from robbers and bandits. The prices of all essential commodities were remarkably cheap. The sultan took a keen interest in agriculture, abolished the octroi duty on grains, and established a new measurement of the yard, called the gaz-i-Sikandari, which continued to prevail until the Mughal times. The rent rolls prepared during his reign formed the basis for the rent rolls of Sher Shah later on.

        Sikandar Lodi is regarded as an orthodox, even a bigoted king. He sternly forbade Muslims from following practices that were against the Sharia (Islamic law), such as women visiting the graves of saints or processions being taken out in memory of saints. He re-imposed the jizya on Hindus and executed a Brahman for holding that the Hindu and Muslim scriptures were equally sacred. He also demolished a few well-known Hindu temples during his campaigns, such as the temple at Nagarkot.

        Sikandar Lodi gave magnificent grants to scholars, philosophers, and men of letters, so that cultured people from all climes and countries, including Arabia and Iran, flocked to his court. Due to the sultan’s efforts, many Sanskrit works were translated into Persian. He was also interested in music and had a number of rare Sanskrit works on music translated into Persian. During his reign, many Hindus learned Persian and were recruited to various administrative posts.

        Thus, the process of cultural rapprochement between Hindus and Muslims continued during his reign. Sikandar Lodi also extended his dominions by conquering Dholpur and Gwalior. During these operations, Sikandar Lodi, after careful survey and deliberation, selected the site for the city of Agra (1506). The town was meant to command the area of eastern Rajasthan and the route to Malwa and Gujarat. Over time, Agra became a large town and the second capital of the Lodis.

        The growing interest of Sikandar in eastern Rajasthan and Malwa was shown by his taking the Khan of Nagaur under his protection and by trying to make Ranthambhor transfer its allegiance from Malwa to Delhi. His successor, Ibrahim Lodi, even led a campaign against Mewar, which was repulsed. The growing power of the Rana in Malwa, and the extension of his power towards Agra and Bayana, presaged a conflict between Mewar and the Lodis. It is difficult to say what the outcome of this conflict would have been if Babur had not intervened.

        Kashmir
            An account of north India in the fifteenth century would be incomplete without mentioning the Kingdom of Kashmir. The beautiful valley of Kashmir was for long a forbidden land for all outsiders. According to al-Biruni, entry into Kashmir was not allowed even to Hindus who were not known personally to the nobles there. During this period, Kashmir was known as a centre of Saivism. However, the situation changed with the end of Hindu rule around the middle of the fourteenth century. The devastating attack on Kashmir in 1320 by the Mongol leader, Dalucha, was a prelude to this. It is said that Dalucha ordered a wholesale massacre of men, while women and children were enslaved and sold to the merchants of Central Asia. The towns and villages were ravaged, plundered, and set on fire. The hapless Kashmir government could offer no opposition to these doings, thereby losing all public sympathy and support.

            One hundred years after the Mongol invasion, Zainul Abidin, considered the greatest of the Muslim monarchs of Kashmir, ascended the throne. Kashmir society had profoundly changed during this period. There had been continuous incursions of Muslim saints and refugees from Central Asia into Kashmir, with the Baramulla route providing easy access. Another development was the rise of a series of remarkable Sufi saints called Rishis, who combined some features of Hinduism and Islam. Partly through the preaching of the saints and partly by force, the lower-class population had been converted to Islam. To complete the process, a vehement persecution of the Brahmins began in the reign of Sikandar Shah (1389-1413). The sultan ordered that all Brahmins and learned Hindus should either convert to Islam or leave the valley. Their temples were to be destroyed, and the idols of gold and silver were to be melted down for currency. It is said that these orders were issued at the behest of the king’s minister, Suha Bhatt, who had converted to Islam and was bent on harassing his former co-religionists.

            This situation changed with the accession of Zainul Abidin (1420-1470), who had all these orders cancelled. He reconciled and brought back to Kashmir all the non-Muslims who had fled. Those who wanted to revert to Hinduism, or had pretended to be Muslims to save their lives, were given freedom to do as they pleased. He even restored the libraries and land grants that the Hindus had enjoyed. The temples were also restored. More than one hundred years later, Abul Fazl noted that Kashmir had one hundred and fifty majestic temples. It is likely that most of these had been restored under Zainul Abidin.

            Zainul Abidin continued the policy of broad toleration in other areas as well. He abolished the siyah (tax on non-Muslims) and cow slaughter, and to respect the wishes of the Hindus, withdrew the ban on sati. Hindus occupied many high offices in his government. Thus, Suha Bhatt was appointed minister of justice and court physician. His first two queens were Hindus, being the daughters of the Raja of Jammu. They were the mothers of all his four sons. He married a third wife after the death of his first two wives.

            The Sultan was himself a learned man and composed poetry. He was well-versed in Persian, Kashmiri, Sanskrit, and Tibetan languages. He gave patronage to Sanskrit and Persian scholars and, at his instance, many Sanskrit works, such as the Mahabharata and Kalhana’s history of Kashmir, Rajatarangini, were translated into Persian and brought up to date. He was fond of music, and upon hearing of this, the Raja of Gwalior sent him two rare Sanskrit works on music.

            The Sultan also looked after the economic development of Kashmir. He sent two persons to Samarkand to learn the arts of papermaking and bookbinding. He fostered many crafts in Kashmir, such as stone-cutting and polishing, bottle-making, gold-beating, etc. He also encouraged the art of shawl-making, for which Kashmir is so famous. Musket-making and the art of manufacturing fireworks also developed in Kashmir. The Sultan advanced agriculture by constructing large numbers of dams, canals, and bridges. He was an enthusiastic builder, and his greatest engineering achievement was Zaina Lanka—the artificial island in the Wular Lake on which he built his palace and a mosque.

            Zainul Abidin is still called Bud Shah (the Great Sultan) by the Kashmiris. Though not a great warrior, he defeated the Mongol invasion of Ladakh, conquered the Baltistan area (called Tibbat-i-buzarg), and kept control over Jammu, Rajouri, etc. He thus unified the Kashmiri kingdom.

            The fame of Zainul Abidin spread far and wide. He was in touch with the leading rulers of other parts of India, as well as the leading rulers of Asia.

            A quick survey of developments during the fifteenth century shows that the regional balance of power could neither give peace nor stability. The regional kingdoms, however, had many cultural contributions to their credit. In these kingdoms, local styles of architecture were developed, often incorporating local traditions. Local languages were also patronized. While some rulers carried out large-scale destruction of temples and tried to present themselves as orthodox Muslim kings, overall, in these kingdoms, the forces of mutual accommodation and cultural integration remained active, with some rulers anticipating Akbar in a number of fields.


- Cultural Development in India (1300–1500)
    The establishment of the Delhi Sultanate at the beginning of the thirteenth century marks a new phase in the cultural development of the country. The Turkish invaders who came to India were by no means rude barbarians. Coming to West Asia during the ninth and tenth centuries from their Central Asian homelands, they had accepted Islam, just as the earlier invaders from Central Asia had accepted Buddhism and Hinduism. They had also assimilated rapidly into the culture of the area. The Arabo-Persian culture, which had embraced the Islamic lands from Morocco and Spain to Iran and its adjacent regions, was at its height at the time. The people of the region had made many important contributions in the fields of science, navigation, literature, and more. When the Turks came to India, they not only had a well-defined faith in Islam to which they were deeply attached, but they also had definite ideas about government, art, architecture, and other areas. The interaction of the Turks with the Indians, who held strong religious beliefs and had well-developed ideas of art, architecture, and literature, resulted in the long run in the development of a new, enriched culture. But the process was a long one, characterized by destruction followed or accompanied by periods of construction. Mutual misunderstanding and strife are always present when two sides hold strongly-held views. More significant, however, were the efforts at mutual understanding, which ultimately led to a process of assimilation in many fields, such as art and architecture, music, literature, and even customs, ceremonies, rituals, religious beliefs, science, and technology. However, the elements of confrontation and conflict remained strongly entrenched in both communities. The process of assimilation and convergence, therefore, had many ups and downs and varied from region to region, field to field, and period to period.

    ARCHITECTURE
        One of the first requirements of the new rulers was to have houses to live in and places of worship. They initially converted some temples and other existing buildings into mosques, while destroying many others and using their material for constructing mosques. Examples of this are the Quwwat-ul-Islam mosque near the Qutub Minar in Delhi and the building at Ajmer called Arhai Din ka Jhonpra. The former had been a temple, and the latter had been a monastery. The only new construction at Delhi was a façade of three elaborately carved arches in front of the garbhagriha, which was demolished. The style of decoration used on these arches is very interesting: no human or animal figures were used, as it was considered un-Islamic to do so. Instead, they used scrolls of flowers and verses from the Quran, which were intertwined in a very artistic manner. Soon, the Turks started constructing their own buildings. For this purpose, they mostly used indigenous craftsmen, such as stone-cutters, masons, etc., who were famous for their skills. Later, some master architects came to India from West Asia. In their buildings, the Turks used the arch and the dome on a wide scale. Neither the arch nor the dome was a Turkish or Muslim invention. The Arabs borrowed them from Rome through the Byzantine Empire, developed them, and made them their own.

        The use of the arch and the dome had a number of advantages. The dome provided a pleasing skyline, and as the architects gained more experience and confidence, the dome rose higher. Many experiments were made in placing a round dome on a square building and raising the dome higher and higher. In this way, many lofty and impressive buildings were constructed. The arch and the dome dispensed with the need for a large number of pillars to support the roof and enabled the construction of large halls with a clear view. Such places of assembly were useful in mosques as well as in palaces. However, the arch and the dome required strong cement; otherwise, the stones could not be held in place. The Turks used fine quality light mortar in their buildings. Thus, new architectural forms and superior mortar became widespread in northern India with the arrival of the Turks.

        The arch and the dome were known to the Indians earlier, but they were not used on a large scale. Moreover, the correct scientific method of constructing the arch was rarely employed. The architectural device generally used by the Indians consisted of placing one stone over another, narrowing the gap until it could be covered by a coping stone or by placing a beam over a slab of stones. The Turkish rulers used both the dome and arch method as well as the slab and beam method in their buildings.

        In the sphere of decoration, the Turks eschewed the representation of human and animal figures in their buildings. Instead, they used geometrical and floral designs, combining them with panels of inscriptions containing verses from the Quran. Thus, the Arabic script itself became a work of art. The combination of these decorative devices was called arabesque. They also freely borrowed Hindu motifs such as the bell motif, the leaf motif, swastika, lotus, etc. Thus, like the Indians, the Turks were intensely fond of decoration. The skill of Indian stone-cutters was fully utilized for this purpose. The walls of the small tomb of Iltutmish (near the Qutub Minar, Delhi) were so intricately carved that hardly a square inch is left vacant. The Turks also added color to their buildings by using red sandstone. Yellow sandstone or marble was used in these buildings for decoration and to highlight the color of red sandstone.

        The most magnificent building constructed by the Turks in the thirteenth century was the Qutub Minar. This tapering tower, originally 71.4 meters high, was begun by Aibak and completed by Iltutmish. It is incorrect to think that it was dedicated to the Sufi saint Qutb-ud-Din Bakhtiyar Kaki, the venerated saint of Delhi, since it was not called the Qutub Minar at the time but the Quwwat-ul-Islam mosque. Although traditions of building towers are found both in India and West Asia, the Qutub Minar is unique in many ways. It derives its effect mainly from the skillful manner in which the balconies have been projected yet linked with the main tower, the use of red and white sandstone, and marble in panels and in the top stages, and the ribbed effect.

        The Khalji period saw significant building activity. Alauddin built his capital at Siri, a few kilometers away from the site around the Qutub. Unfortunately, hardly anything of this city survives now. Alauddin planned a tower twice the height of the Qutub but did not live to complete it. However, he added an entrance door to the Qutub. This door, known as the Alai Darwaza, has arches of very pleasing proportions. It also contains a dome, which, for the first time, was built on correct scientific lines. Thus, the art of building the arch and the dome on scientific lines had been mastered by Indian craftsmen by this time.

        There was great building activity during the Tughlaq period, which marked both the climax of the Delhi Sultanate and the beginning of its decline. Ghiyasuddin and Muhammad Tughlaq built the huge palace-fortress complex called Tughlaqabad. By blocking the passage of the Yamuna, a huge artificial lake was created around it. The tomb of Ghiyasuddin marks a new trend in architecture. To achieve a good skyline, the building was placed upon a high platform. Its beauty was heightened by a marble dome.

        A striking feature of Tughlaq architecture was the sloping walls. This is called ‘batter,’ and it gives the effect of strength and solidity to the building. However, we do not find any ‘batter’ in the buildings of Firuz Tughlaq. A second feature of Tughlaq architecture was the deliberate attempt to combine the principles of the arch and the lintel and beam in their buildings. This is clearly visible in the buildings of Firuz Tughlaq. The Hauz Khas was a pleasure resort and had a huge lake around it. It also had a madrasa. The same features are found in some buildings of Firuz Shah’s new fort, now called the Kotla. The Tughlaqs generally did not use the costly red sandstone in their buildings but the cheaper and more easily available grey stone. Since it was not easy to carve this type of stone, the Tughlaq buildings have minimal decoration. However, the decorative device found in all the buildings of Firuz is the lotus.

        Many grand mosques were also built during this period. It is not possible to describe all of them here. What is worth noting is that, by this time, an independent style of architecture had emerged in India, combining many of the new devices brought by the Turks with the indigenous forms. The Lodis developed this tradition further. Both the arch and the lintel and beam were used in their buildings. Balconies, kiosks, and eaves of the Rajasthani-Gujarati style were also used. Another device used by the Lodis was placing their buildings, especially tombs, on a high platform, thus giving the building a sense of size as well as a better skyline. Some of the tombs were placed in the midst of gardens. The Lodi Garden in Delhi is a fine example of this. Some of the tombs were octagonal in shape. Many of these features were later adopted by the Mughals, culminating in the Taj Mahal built by Shah Jahan.

        By the time of the breakup of the Delhi Sultanate, individual styles of architecture had also developed in the various kingdoms in different parts of India. Many of these, again, were powerfully influenced by local architectural traditions. As we have seen, this happened in Bengal, Gujarat, Malwa, the Deccan, etc. During the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, the architectural style evolved in Delhi under the Tughlaqs, which was carried forward and modified in the various regional kingdoms. Thus, there was an outburst of building activity, marked by the growth of many styles of architecture in different parts of the country.

    Religious Traditions and Beliefs
        Islam was not a stranger in India when the Turks established their empire in northern India. Islam had been established in Sindh since the eighth century and in Punjab from the tenth century. Arab travelers had settled in Kerala between the eighth and tenth centuries. During this period, Arab travelers and Sufi saints traveled to different parts of India. Al-Biruni’s book Kitab-ul-Hind and other writings had familiarized the learned sections in West Asia with Hindu ideas and beliefs. As noted earlier, Buddhist texts, Indian fables, and books on astronomy and medicine had been translated into Arabic. Visits by Indian yogis to the region were not uncommon. The influence of Buddhism and Vedantic ideas on Islamic thinking has been a subject of considerable debate among scholars. Remnants of Buddhist monasteries, stupas, and images of the Buddha found in Afghanistan and parts of Central Asia, particularly along old trade routes, show the extent of Buddhist influence in these areas at one time. While it is difficult to determine the precise extent of the influence of Indian philosophical ideas, it is hardly disputable that both Greek and Indian ideas, in varying proportions, made a definite contribution to the development of Islamic philosophy in its formative phase. These ideas provided the background to the rise of the Sufi movement, which, after its establishment in India in the twelfth century, influenced both Muslims and Hindus, providing a common platform for the two. However, scholars believe that while various rituals and practices, including yogic practices, were freely drawn from Hinduism by the early Sufis and assimilated into their system, their basic ideological structure remained Islamic.

    The Sufi Movement
        The tenth century is significant in Islamic history for a variety of reasons: it marks the rise of the Turks on the ruins of the Abbasid Caliphate, as well as important changes in the realm of ideas and beliefs. In the realm of ideas, it marks the end of the domination of the Mutazila or rationalist philosophy, and the rise of orthodox schools based on the Quran and Hadith (traditions of the Prophet and his companions) and of the Sufi mystic orders. The ‘rationalists’ had been accused of spreading skepticism and atheism. In particular, it was argued that their philosophy of monism, which held that God and the created world were fundamentally one, was heretical on the grounds that it abolished the difference between the creator and the created.

        The works of the ‘traditionalists’ crystallized into four schools of Islamic law. Of these, the Hanafi school, which was the most liberal, was adopted by the eastern Turks who later came to India.

        Mystics, known as Sufis, had risen in Islam at a very early stage. Most of them were persons of deep devotion who were disgusted by the vulgar display of wealth and degeneration of morals following the establishment of the Islamic empire. Hence, these saints wanted nothing to do with the state—a tradition which continued later on. Some of the early Sufis, such as the woman mystic Rabia (d. eighth century) and Mansur bin Hallaj (d. tenth century), placed great emphasis on love as the bond between God and the individual soul. However, their pantheistic approach led them into conflict with the orthodox elements, who had Mansur executed for heresy. Despite this setback, mystic ideas continued to spread among the Muslim masses.

        Al-Ghazzali (d. 1112), who is venerated both by the orthodox elements and the Sufis, tried to reconcile mysticism with Islamic orthodoxy. He succeeded to a large extent. He further discredited the ‘rationalist’ philosophy by arguing that positive knowledge of God and His qualities cannot be gained by reason but only by revelation. Thus, the revealed book, the Quran, was vital for a mystic.

        Around this time, the Sufis were organized into 12 orders or silsilahs. A silsilah was generally led by a prominent mystic who lived in a khangah or hospice with his disciples. The link between the teacher or pir and his disciples or murid was a vital part of the Sufi system. Every pir nominated a successor or walt to carry on his work.

        The monastic organization of the Sufis, and some of their practices such as penance, fasting, and holding the breath, are sometimes traced to Buddhist and Hindu yogic influences. Buddhism was widely prevalent in Central Asia before the advent of Islam, and the legend of the Buddha as a saintly man had passed into Islamic legend. Yogis continued to visit West Asia even after the advent of Islam, and the yogic book Amrit-kund had been translated into Persian from Sanskrit. Thus, Hindu and Buddhist practices and rituals seem to have been absorbed and assimilated by the Sufis even before they came to India. Whether Buddhist philosophical ideas and Vedantic ideas had, in a significant manner, influenced Sufism is a matter of controversy. The origin of ideas is difficult to trace. The Sufi saints and many modern thinkers trace Sufi ideas to the Quran. What is important to note here is that, irrespective of origin, there were many similarities in the ideas of the Sufis and Hindu yogis and mystics regarding the nature of God, His relationship with the soul, and the material world. This provided a basis for mutual toleration and understanding. The humane spirit of Sufism is well expressed by Sanai, a leading Persian poet of the time:

        “Faith and infidelity, both are galloping on the way towards Him;
        And are exclaiming (together): He is one and none share His kingdom.”

        The Sufi orders are broadly divided into two: Ba-shura, which followed Islamic law (shara), and de-shara, which were not bound by it. Both types of orders prevailed in India, with the latter being followed more by wandering saints. Although these saints did not establish an order, some became figures of popular veneration, often for both Muslims and Hindus alike.

    The Chishti and Suharwardi Silsilahs
        Of the ba-shura movements, only two acquired significant influence and following in northern India during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. These were the Chishti and Suharwardi silsilahs. The Chishti order was established in India by Khwaja Muinuddin Chishti, who came to India around 1192, shortly after the defeat and death of Prithvi Raj Chauhan. After staying for some time in Lahore and Delhi, he finally settled in Ajmer, which was an important political center and already had a sizable Muslim population. No authentic record of his activities is available; he did not write any books, but his fame rose along with that of his successors. Among the disciples of Shaikh Muinuddin (d. 1235) were Bakhtiyar Kaki and his disciple Farid-ud-Din Ganj-i-Shakar. Farid-ud-Din confined his activities to Hansi and Ajodhan (in modern Haryana and the Punjab, respectively). He was deeply respected in Delhi, so much so that streams of people would throng around him whenever he visited Delhi. His outlook was so broad and humane that some of his verses were later found quoted in the Adi-Granth of the Sikhs.

        The most famous of the Chishti saints, however, were Nizamuddin Auliya and Nasiruddin Chiragh-i-Delhi. These early Sufis mingled freely with people of the lower classes, including Hindus. They led a simple, austere life and conversed with people in Hindawi, their local dialect. They were hardly interested in effecting conversions, though later on, many families and groups attributed their conversion to the ‘good wishes’ of these saints. These Sufi saints made themselves popular by adopting musical recitations called sama, to create a mood of nearness to God. Moreover, they often chose Hindi verses for the purpose, since they could make a greater impact on their listeners. Nizamuddin Auliya adopted yogic breathing exercises, so much so that the yogis called him a sidh or ‘perfect’.

        After the death of Nasiruddin Chiragh-i-Delhi in the middle of the fourteenth century, the Chishtis did not have a commanding figure in Delhi. As a result, the Chishti saints dispersed and extended their message to the eastern and southern parts of India.

        The Suharwardi order entered India at about the same time as the Chishtis, but its activities were confined largely to the Punjab and Multan. The most well-known saints of the order were Shaikh Shihabuddin Suharwardi and Hamid-ud-Din Nagori. Unlike the Chishtis, the Suharwardi saints did not believe in leading a life of poverty. They accepted the service of the state, and some of them held important posts in the ecclesiastical department. The Chishtis, on the other hand, preferred to keep aloof from state politics and shunned the company of rulers and nobles. Nevertheless, both helped the rulers in their own way by creating a climate of opinion in which people of different sects and religions could live in peace and harmony. While Mecca remained the holiest site, the rise of popular saints provided a useful point of veneration and devotion for the mass of Muslims within the country.

    THE BHAKTI MOVEMENT
        The Bhakti movement, which stressed the mystical union of the individual with God, had been at work in India long before the arrival of the Turks. Although the seeds of Bhakti can be found in the Vedas, it was not emphasized during the early period. The idea of the adoration of a personal God seems to have developed with the growing popularity of Buddhism. During the early centuries of the Christian era, under Mahayana Buddhism, the Buddha began to be worshipped in his ‘gracious’ (Avalokiteshvara) form. The worship of Vishnu developed more or less at the same time. When many of the holy books, such as the Ramayana and the Mahabharata, were rewritten during the Gupta period, Bhakti was accepted, along with Jnana and Karma, as one of the recognized roads to salvation.

        However, the development of popular Bhakti took place in South India between the seventh and twelfth centuries. As has been noticed earlier, the Saiva Nayanmars and the Vaishnavite Alvars disregarded the austerities preached by the Jains and the Buddhists and preached personal devotion to God as a means of salvation. They disregarded the rigidities of the caste system and carried their message of love and personal devotion to God to various parts of South India by using the local languages.

        Although there were many points of contact between South and North India, the transmission of the ideas of the Bhakti saints from South to North India was a slow and long-drawn-out process. Oddly enough, the very reasons that made the Nayanmars and Alvars popular in the South limited their appeal outside the area, i.e., the fact that they preached and composed in the local languages. Sanskrit was still the vehicle of thought in the country. The ideas of Bhakti were carried to the North by scholars as well as by saints. Among these, mention may be made of the Maharashtrian saint, Namadeva, who flourished in the first part of the fourteenth century, and Ramananda, who lived in the second half of the fourteenth and the first quarter of the fifteenth century. Namadeva was a tailor who is said to have taken to banditry before he became a saint. His poetry, written in Marathi, breathes a spirit of intense love and devotion to God. Namadeva is said to have travelled far and wide and engaged in discussions with the Sufi saints at Delhi. Ramananda, who was a follower of Ramanuja, was born in Prayag (Allahabad) and lived there and in Banaras. He substituted the worship of Rama in place of Vishnu. What is more, he taught his doctrine of Bhakti to all the four varnas, disregarding the ban on people of different castes cooking together and sharing their meals. He enrolled disciples from all castes, including the low castes. Among his disciples were Ravidas, a cobbler by caste; Kabir, a weaver; Sena, a barber; and Sadhana, a butcher. Namadeva was equally broad-minded in enrolling his disciples.

        The seeds scattered by these saints fell on fertile soil. The Brahmans had lost both prestige and power following the defeat of the Rajput rulers and the establishment of the Turkish Sultanate. As a result, movements, such as the Nath Panthi movement, challenging the caste system and the superiority of the Brahmans, had gained popularity.

        These coincided with the Islamic ideas of equality and brotherhood preached by the Sufi saints. People were no longer satisfied with a religion that only emphasized ceremonies and forms. They wanted a religion that could satisfy both their reason and emotions. It was due to these factors that the Bhakti movement became popular in North India during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.

        Among those who were most critical of the existing social order and made a strong plea for Hindu-Muslim unity, the names of Kabir and Nanak stand out. There is a good deal of uncertainty about the dates and early life of Kabir. Legend has it that he was the son of a Brahman widow who abandoned him after his birth, and that he was brought up in the house of a Muslim weaver. He learned the profession of his adopted father, but while living in Kashi, he came into contact with both Hindu and Muslim saints. Kabir, who is generally placed in the fifteenth century, emphasized the unity of Allah, Sain, Sahib, etc. He strongly denounced idol worship, pilgrimages, bathing in holy rivers, and taking part in formal worship, including namaz. Nor did he consider it necessary to abandon the life of a householder for the sake of a saintly life. Though familiar with yogic practices, he considered neither asceticism nor book knowledge important for true knowledge. As the modern historian Dr. Tara Chand says: “The mission of Kabir was to preach a religion of love which would unite all castes and creeds. He rejected those features of Hinduism and Islam which were against this spirit and which were of no importance for the real spiritual welfare of the individual.” Kabir strongly denounced the caste system, especially the practice of untouchability, and emphasized the fundamental unity of man. He was opposed to all kinds of discrimination between human beings, whether on the basis of castes, religion, race, family, or wealth. His sympathies were decidedly with the poor, with whom he identified himself. However, he was not a social reformer; his emphasis was on the reform of the individual under the guidance of a true guru or teacher.

        Guru Nanak, from whose teachings the Sikh religion was derived, was born into a Khatri family in the village of Talwandi (now called Nankana) on the bank of the river Ravi in 1469. Although married early and trained in Persian to take his father’s profession of accountancy, Nanak showed a mystic and contemplative bent of mind, and preferred the company of saints and sadhus. Sometime later, he had a mystic vision and forsook the world. He composed hymns and sang them to the accompaniment of the rabab, a stringed instrument played by his faithful attendant, Mardana. It is said that Nanak undertook wide tours all over India and even beyond it, to Sri Lanka in the south and Mecca and Medina in the West. He attracted a large number of people towards him, and his name and fame had spread far and wide before his death in 1538.

        Like Kabir, Nanak laid emphasis on the one God, by repeating whose name and dwelling on it with love and devotion one could attain salvation without distinction of caste, creed, or sect. However, Nanak laid great emphasis on the purity of character and conduct as the first condition for approaching God, and the need for a guru for guidance. Like Kabir, he strongly denounced idol worship, pilgrimages, and other formal observances of various faiths. He advocated a middle path in which spiritual life could be combined with the duties of the householder.

        Nanak had no intention of founding a new religion. His catholic approach aimed at bridging distinctions between Hindus and Muslims in order to create an atmosphere of peace, goodwill, and mutual give and take. This was also the aim of Kabir. Different opinions have been expressed by scholars about the impact of their ideas on the large mass of Hindus and Muslims. It has been argued that the old forms of religion continued almost unchanged. Nor was it possible to effect any major breach in the caste system. In course of time, the ideas of Nanak gave birth to a new creed, Sikhism, while the followers of Kabir shrank into a sect, the Kabir Panthis. The importance of the mission of Kabir and Nanak should, however, be assessed from a broader point of view. They created a climate of opinion that continued to work through the succeeding centuries. It is well known that the religious ideas and policies of Akbar reflected in a remarkable manner the fundamental teachings of these two great saints. Nor was Akbar alone in pursuing such policies, as we have seen in the earlier chapter.

        However, it was hardly to be expected that the orthodox elements in the two main religions, Hinduism and Islam, would surrender without a fight. As we shall see, the orthodox elements mustered behind the defense of the old faith, which was redefined to meet the new challenge. The struggle between these two broad trends—one liberal and non-sectarian, the other orthodox and traditional—was at the heart of the intellectual and religious controversies during the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries. This continuing struggle shows that the impact of the ideas and concepts put forward by Kabir, Nanak, and others of the same way of thinking was by no means insignificant.

    The Vaishnavite Movement
        Apart from the non-sectarian movement led by Kabir and Nanak, the Bhakti movement in North India developed around the worship of Rama and Krishna, two incarnations of the god Vishnu. The childhood escapades of the boy Krishna and his dalliance with the milkmaids of Gokul, especially with Radha, became the themes of a remarkable series of saint-poets who lived and preached during the fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries. They used the love between Radha and Krishna in an allegorical manner to depict the relationship of love, in its various aspects, between the individual soul and the supreme soul.

        Like the early Sufis, Chaitanya popularised musical gatherings, or kirtans, as a special form of mystic experience in which the outside world disappeared by dwelling on God’s name. According to Chaitanya, worship consisted of love, devotion, song, and dance, which produced a state of ecstasy in which the presence of God, whom he called Hari, could be realised. Such worship could be carried out by all, irrespective of caste or creed.

        The writings of Narsinha Mehta in Gujarat, Meera in Rajasthan, Surdas in western Uttar Pradesh, and Chaitanya in Bengal and Orissa reached extraordinary heights of lyrical fervour and love that transcended all boundaries, including those of caste and creed. These saints were prepared to welcome anyone into their fold, irrespective of caste or creed. This is seen most clearly in the life of Chaitanya. Born and schooled in Nadia, which was the centre of Vedantic rationalism, Chaitanya’s course of life was changed when he visited Gaya at the age of twenty-two and was initiated into the Krishna cult by a recluse. He became a god-intoxicated devotee who incessantly uttered the name of Krishna. Chaitanya is said to have travelled all over India, including Vrindavan, where he revived the Krishna cult. But most of his time was spent in Gaya. He exerted an extraordinary influence, particularly in the eastern parts of India, and attracted a wide following, including some Muslims and people from low castes. He did not reject the scriptures or idol-worship, though he cannot be classified as a traditionalist.

        All the saint-poets mentioned above remained within the broad framework of Hinduism. Their philosophic beliefs were a brand of Vedantic monism, which emphasised the fundamental unity of God and the created world. The Vedantic philosophy had been propounded by a number of thinkers, but the one who probably influenced the saint-poets the most was Vallabha, a Tailang Brahmin, who lived in the last part of the fifteenth and early part of the sixteenth century.

        The approach of these saint-poets was broadly humanistic. They emphasised the broadest human sentiments—the sentiments of love and beauty in all their forms. Like the other non-sectarians, they were not able to make an effective breach in the caste system. However, they softened its rigour and built a platform for unity that could be apprehended by wider sections.

        The basic concepts of the saint-poets were reciprocated to a remarkable degree by the Sufi poets and saints of the period. During the fifteenth century, the monistic ideas of the great Arab philosopher Ibn-i-Arabi became popular among broad sections in India. Arabi had been vehemently denounced by the orthodox elements, and his followers persecuted because he held that all beings are essentially one, and everything is a manifestation of the divine substance. Thus, in his opinion, the different religions were identical. Arabi’s doctrine of Unity of Being is known as Tauhid-i-Wajudi (unity of being). This doctrine kept gaining popularity in India and became the main basis of Sufi thought before the time of Akbar. Contact with yogis and Hindu saints went a long way in popularising the concept of pantheism. The Indian Sufis started taking more interest in Sanskrit and Hindi, and a few of them, including Malik Muhammad Jaisi, composed their works in Hindi. The Bhakti songs of the Vaishnavite saints, written in Hindi and other languages, touched the hearts of the Sufis more than Persian poetry did. The use of Hindi songs became so popular that an eminent Sufi, Abdul Wahid Bilgrami, wrote a treatise Hagaig-i-Hind, in which he tried to explain such words as ‘Krishna,’ ‘Murli,’ ‘Gopis,’ ‘Radha,’ ‘Yamuna,’ etc., in Sufi mystic terms.

        Thus, during the fifteenth and early sixteenth century, the Bhakti and Sufi saints had worked out, in a remarkable manner, a common platform on which people belonging to various sects and creeds could meet and understand each other.

        This was the essential background to the ideas of Akbar and his concept of tauhid or unity of all religions.

        Literature and Fine Arts

    Sanskrit Literature
        Sanskrit continued to be a vehicle for higher thought and a medium for literature during the period under review. In fact, the production of works in Sanskrit in different branches was immense and perhaps greater than in the preceding period. Following the great Sankara, works in the field of philosophy by Ramanuja, Madhava, Vallabha, etc., continued to be written in Sanskrit. The speed with which their ideas were widely disseminated and discussed in different parts of the country showed the important role Sanskrit continued to play during the period. There was a network of specialised schools and academies in different parts of the country, including areas under Muslim domination. These schools and academies were not interfered with and continued to flourish. In fact, many of them took advantage of the introduction of paper to reproduce and disseminate older texts. Thus, some of the oldest available texts of the Ramayana and the Mahabharata, written on paper, belong to the period between the eleventh and twelfth centuries.

        Besides philosophy, works in the field of Ravya (poetical narrative), drama, fiction, medicine, astronomy, music, etc., continued to be written in Sanskrit. A large number of commentaries and digests on Hindu law (Dharmashastras) were prepared between the twelfth and sixteenth centuries. The great Mitakshara of Vijayaneshwar, which forms one of the two principal Hindu schools of law, cannot be placed earlier than the twelfth century. Another famous commentator was Chandeshwar of Bihar, who lived in the fourteenth century. Most of the other works were produced in the south, followed by Bengal, Mithila, and western India under the patronage of Hindu rulers. The Jains, too, contributed to the growth of Sanskrit. Hemachandra Suri was the most eminent of these. Oddly enough, these works largely ignored the presence of the Muslims in the country. Little attempt was made to translate Islamic works or Persian literature into Sanskrit. Possibly, the only exception was the translation of the love story of Yusuf and Zulaikha, written by the famous Persian poet Jami, and the translation of works on the astrolabe, used in navigation and astrology.

    Arabic and Persian Literature
        Although the greatest amount of literature and scientific works produced by the Muslims was in Arabic, which was the language of the Prophet and was used as the language of literature and science from Spain to Baghdad, the Turks who came to India were deeply influenced by the Persian language, which had become the literary and administrative language of Central Asia from the tenth century onwards. In India, the use of Arabic remained largely confined to a narrow circle of Islamic scholars and philosophers, most of the original literature on the subject being written in Arabic. A few works on science and astronomy were also translated from Arabic. In course of time, digests of the Islamic law were prepared in Persian with the help of Indian scholars. The most well-known of these were prepared in the reign of Firuz Tughlaq. But Arabic digests continued to be prepared, the most famous of these being the Fatawa-z-Alamgirt, or the Digest of Laws, prepared by a group of jurists in the reign of Aurangzeb.

        With the arrival of the Turks in India during the tenth century, a new language, Persian, was introduced in the country. There was a resurgence of the Persian language in Iran and Central Asia from the tenth century onwards, and some of the greatest poets of the Persian language, such as Firdausi and Sadi, lived and composed their works between the tenth and fourteenth centuries. From the beginning, the Turks adopted Persian as the language of literature and administration in the country. Thus, Lahore emerged as the first centre for the cultivation of the Persian language. Although the works of only a few of these early writers of Persian in India have survived, we find in the writings of some of them, such as Masud Sad Salman, a sense of attachment and love for Lahore. However, the most notable Persian writer of the period was Amir Khusrau. Born in 1252 at Patiali (near Badayun in western Uttar Pradesh), Amir Khusrau took pride in being Indian. He says: “I have praised India for two reasons. First, because India is the land of my birth and our country. Love of the country is an important obligation… Hindustan is like heaven. Its climate is better than that of Khurasan… it is green and full of flowers all the year round… The Brahmans here are as learned as Aristotle and there are many scholars in various fields…”

        Khusrau’s love for India shows that the Turkish ruling class was no longer prepared to behave as a foreign ruling class and that the ground had been prepared for a cultural rapprochement between them and the Indians.

        Khusrau wrote a large number of poetical works, including historical romances. He experimented with all the poetical forms and created a new style of Persian, which came to be called the sabaq-i-hindi or the style of India.

        Khusrau praised the Indian languages, including Hindi (which he calls Hindavi). Some of his scattered Hindi verses are found, though the Hindi work Khaliq Bart, often attributed to Khusrau, was in all probability the work of a later poet of the same name. He was also an accomplished musician and took part in religious musical gatherings (sama) organised by the famous Sufi saint, Nizamuddin Auliya. Khusrau, it is said, gave up his life the day after he learned of the death of his pir, Nizamuddin Auliya (1325). He was buried in the same compound.

        Apart from poetry, a strong school of history writing in Persian developed in India during this period. The most famous historians of this period were Ziauddin Barani, Aff, and Isami.

        Through the Persian language, India was able to develop close cultural relations with Central Asia and Iran. In course of time, Persian became not only the language of administration and diplomacy but also the language of the upper classes and their dependents, at first in North India and later across the entire country with the expansion of the Delhi Sultanate to the south and the establishment of Muslim kingdoms in different parts of the country.

        Thus, Sanskrit and Persian, in the main, functioned as link languages in the country in politics, religion, and philosophy, as well as being means of literary production. At first, there was little interchange between the two. Zia Nakhshabi (d. 1350) was the first to translate into Persian Sanskrit stories, such as the one where a parrot relates stories to a woman whose husband has gone on a journey. This book Taz Nama (Book of the Parrot), written during the time of Muhammad Tughlaq, proved very popular and was translated from Persian into Turkish and into many European languages as well. He also translated the old Indian treatise on sexology, the Kok Shastra, into Persian. Later, during the time of Firuz Shah, Sanskrit books on medicine and music were translated into Persian. Sultan Zain-ul-Abidin of Kashmir had the famous historical work Rajatarangini and the Mahabharata translated into Persian. At his instance, Sanskrit works on medicine and music were also translated into Persian. Recent research shows that some works on mathematics, astronomy, and medicine were translated into Sanskrit during this period.

    Regional Languages
        During this period, literary works of high quality were produced in many of the regional languages as well. Many of these languages, such as Hindi, Bengali, and Marathi, trace their origins back to around the eighth century. Some others, such as Tamil, were much older. Written at the beginning of the fourteenth century, Amir Khusrau noted the existence of regional languages and remarked: “These languages have, from ancient times, been applied in every way to the common purposes of life.” The rise to maturity of many of these languages and their use as means for literary works may be considered a striking feature of the medieval period.

        There were many reasons for this. Perhaps, with the loss of prestige by the Brahmins, Sanskrit also lost some of its prestige. The use of the common language by the Bhakti saints was undoubtedly an important factor in the rise of these languages. In fact, in many parts of the country, the early saints fashioned these languages for literary purposes. It seems that in many regional kingdoms of the pre-Turkish period, regional languages, such as Tamil, Kannada, Marathi, etc., were used for administrative purposes, in addition to Sanskrit. This must have continued under Turkish rule, as we hear of Hindi-knowing revenue accountants appointed in the Delhi Sultanate.

        Later, when the Delhi Sultanate broke up, local languages, in addition to Persian, continued to be used for administrative purposes in many of the regional kingdoms. Thus, literature in Telugu developed in South India under the patronage of the Vijayanagara rulers. Marathi was one of the administrative languages in the Bahmani kingdom, and later, at the court of Bijapur. In course of time, when these languages reached a certain stage of development, some of the Muslim kings gave them patronage for literary purposes as well. For example, Nusrat Shah of Bengal had the Mahabharata and the Ramayana translated into Bengali. Maladhar Basu also translated the Bhagavata into Bengali under his patronage. His patronage of Bengali poets has been mentioned earlier.

        The use of Bhakti poems in Hindi by the Sufi saints in their musical gatherings has been mentioned before. In Jaunpur, Sufi saints such as Malik Muhammad Jaisi wrote in Hindi and presented Sufi concepts in a form easily understood by the common man. They popularized many Persian forms, such as the masnavi.

    Fine Arts
        Trends toward mutual understanding and integration are found not only in the fields of religious beliefs and rituals, architecture, and literature, but also in the fields of fine arts, particularly music. When the Turks came to India, they inherited the rich Arab tradition of music, which had been further developed in Iran and Central Asia. They brought with them several new musical instruments, such as the rabab and sarangi, along with new musical modes and regulations. Indian music and Indian musicians at the court of the caliphs in Baghdad possibly influenced the development of music there. However, systematic contact between the two began in India under the Sultanate.

        We have already referred to Amir Khusrau. Khusrau, who was given the title of shaykh or master of both the theory and practice of music, introduced many Perso-Arabic ragas, such as aman, ghora, and senam. He is credited with having invented the sitar, although we have no evidence of it. The tabla, which is also attributed to him, seems to have developed during the late seventeenth or early eighteenth century.

        The process of integration in the field of music continued under Firuz, who used to listen to music every Friday after namaz. The Indian classical work Regadarpan was translated into Persian during this reign. Musical gatherings spread from the abodes of the Sufis to the palaces of the nobles. Sultan Husain Sharqi, the ruler of Jaunpur, was a great patron of music. The Sufi saint Pir Bodhan is supposed to have been the second great musician of the age. Another regional kingdom where music was highly cultivated was the kingdom of Gwalior. Raja Man Singh of Gwalior was a great music lover. The work Mar Kautihal, which included all the new musical modes introduced by the Muslims, was prepared under his patronage.

        We do not know at what time the musical modes in North India began to differ from those in the South. However, there is little doubt that the differentiation was largely due to the incorporation of Perso-Arabic modes, airs, and scales. A distinctive style of music, influenced in considerable measure by Persian music, developed in the kingdom of Kashmir.

        After the conquest of Jaunpur, Sikandar Lodi continued its tradition of patronizing music on a lavish scale—a tradition that was later adopted by the Mughal rulers.


- Struggle for Empire in North India—The Mughals and Afghans (1525-1555)
    CENTRAL ASIA AND BEYOND
        Important changes took place in Central and West Asia during the fifteenth century. After the disintegration of the Mongol empire in the fourteenth century, Timur united Iran and Turan under one rule once again. Timur’s empire extended from the lower Volga to the river Indus and included Asia Minor (modern Turkey), Iran, Trans-Oxiana, Afghanistan, and part of the Punjab. Timur died in 1405, but his grandson, Shahrukh Mirza (d. 1448), was able to keep intact a large part of his empire. He gave patronage to arts and letters, and during his reign, Samarkand and Herat became cultural centers of West Asia. The ruler of Samarkand had great prestige in the entire Islamic world.

        The power of the Timurids declined rapidly during the second half of the fifteenth century, largely due to the Timurid tradition of partitioning the empire. The various Timurid principalities that arose were always engaged in fighting and wrangling among themselves. This provided an opportunity for two new elements to come to the forefront. From the north, a Turko-Mongol tribe, the Uzbeks, moved into Trans-Oxiana. The Uzbeks had become Muslims but were looked down upon by the Timurids, who considered them uncultured barbarians. Further to the west, a new dynasty, the Safavid dynasty, began to dominate Iran. The Safavids were descended from an order of saints who traced their ancestry to the Prophet. They supported the Shiite sect among Muslims and persecuted those who were not prepared to accept Shiite tenets. The Uzbeks, on the other hand, were Sunnis. Thus, political conflict between these two elements was embittered by sectarian strife. Further to the west of Iran, the power of the Ottoman Turks was growing. They sought to dominate Eastern Europe, as well as Iraq and Iran. (See Map A, Appendix.)

        Thus, the stage was set for the conflict of three mighty empires in Asia during the sixteenth century.

        In 1494, at the young age of twelve, Babur succeeded to Farghana, a small state in Trans-Oxiana. Oblivious to the Uzbek danger, the Timurid princes were busy fighting one another. Babur, too, made a bid to conquer Samarqand from his uncle. He won the city twice but lost it both times. The second time, the Uzbek chief, Shaibani Khan, was called in to help oust Babur. Shaibani defeated Babur and conquered Samarqand. Soon, he overran the rest of the Timurid kingdoms in the area. This forced Babur to move toward Kabul, which he conquered in 1504. For the next fourteen years, Babur kept biding his time for the reconquest of his homeland from the Uzbeks. He tried to enlist the help of his uncle, the ruler of Herat, but to no avail. Ultimately, Herat was also overrun by Shaibani Khan. This led to a direct conflict between the Uzbeks and the Safavids, as the latter also laid claim to Herat and the surrounding area, which was referred to as Khurasan by contemporary writers. In a famous battle in 1510, near Merv, Shah Ismail, the Shah of Iran, defeated and killed Shaibani Khan. Babur then made another attempt to recover Samarqand, this time with the help of Iranian forces. He was duly installed in Samarqand but chafed under the control of the Iranian generals, who wanted to treat Babur as the governor of an Iranian province rather than as an independent prince. Meanwhile, the Uzbeks recovered rapidly from their defeat. Once again, Babur was ousted from Samarqand and had to return to Kabul. Finally, Shah Ismail himself was defeated by the Ottoman Sultan in 1514, thus leaving the Uzbeks as masters of Trans-Oxiana.

        These developments ultimately forced Babur to look toward India.

    Conquest of India
        Babur states that from the time he obtained Kabul (1504) until his victory at Panipat, “I had never ceased to think of the conquest of Hindustan.” But he had never found a suitable opportunity to undertake it, “hindered as I was sometimes by the apprehensions of my degs, sometimes by the disagreements between my brothers and myself.” Like countless earlier invaders from Central Asia, Babur was drawn to India by the lure of its fabulous wealth. India was the land of gold and riches. Babur’s ancestor, Timur, had not only carried away a vast treasure and many skilled artisans who helped him consolidate his Asian empire and beautify his capital, but he had also annexed some areas in the Punjab. These areas remained in the possession of Timur’s successors for several generations. When Babur conquered Afghanistan, he felt that he had a legitimate right to these areas. Another reason Babur coveted the Punjab was the meager income from Kabul. The historian Abul Fazl remarks: “He (Babur) ruled over Badakhshan, Qandhar, and Kabul, which did not yield sufficient income for the requirements of the army; in fact, in some of the border territories, the expenses of controlling the armies and administration were greater than the income.” With these meager resources, Babur could not provide well for his degs and kinsmen. He was also apprehensive of an Uzbek attack on Kabul and considered India to be a good place of refuge, as well as a suitable base for operations against the Uzbeks.

        The political situation in northwest India was suitable for Babur’s entry into India. Sikandar Lodi had died in 1517, and Ibrahim Lodi had succeeded him. Ibrahim’s efforts to create a strong, centralized empire alarmed both the Afghan chiefs and the Rajputs. One of the most powerful Afghan chiefs was Daulat Khan Lodi, the governor of the Punjab, who was almost an independent ruler. Daulat Khan attempted to conciliate Ibrahim Lodi by sending his son to his court to pay homage. At the same time, he sought to strengthen his position by annexing the frontier tracts of Bhira, etc.

        In 1518-19, Babur conquered the powerful fort of Bhira. He then sent letters and verbal messages to Daulat Khan and Ibrahim Lodi, asking for the cession of areas that had belonged to the Turks. But Daulat Khan detained Babur’s envoy at Lahore, neither granting him an audience nor allowing him to go to Ibrahim Lodi. When Babur returned to Kabul, Daulat Khan occupied Bhira and expelled Babur’s agents stationed there.

        In 1520-21, Babur once again crossed the Indus and easily captured Bhira and Sialkot, the twin gateways to Hindustan. Lahore also capitulated to him. He might have proceeded further but for the news of a revolt at Qandhar. He retraced his steps, and after a siege of a year and a half, recaptured Qandhar. Thus reassured, Babur was once again able to turn his attention toward India.

        It was about this time that Babur received an embassy from Daulat Khan Lodi, led by his son, Dilawar Khan. They invited Babur to India, suggesting that he displace Ibrahim Lodi since he was a tyrant and enjoyed no support from his nobles. It is probable that a messenger from Rana Sanga arrived at the same time, inviting Babur to invade India. These embassies convinced Babur that the time was ripe for his conquest of the Punjab, if not all of India.

        In 1525, while Babur was at Peshawar, he received the news that Daulat Khan Lodi had changed sides again. He had collected an army of 30,000-40,000 men, ousted Babur’s men from Sialkot, and was marching to Lahore. Upon Babur’s approach, Daulat Khan’s army melted away. Daulat Khan submitted and was pardoned. Thus, within three weeks of crossing the Indus, Babur became the master of the Punjab.

    The Battle of Panipat (20 April 1526)
        A conflict with Ibrahim Lodi, the ruler of Delhi, was inevitable, and Babur prepared for it by marching towards Delhi. Ibrahim Lodi met Babur at Panipat with a force estimated at 100,000 men and 1,000 elephants. Since the Indian armies generally contained large hordes of servants, the fighting men on Ibrahim Lodi’s side must have been far fewer than this figure. Babur had crossed the Indus with a force of 12,000, but this had been swelled by his army in India and the large number of Hindustani nobles and soldiers who joined Babur in the Punjab. Even then, Babur’s army was numerically inferior. Babur strengthened his position by resting one wing of his army on the city of Panipat, which had a large number of houses, and protected the other wing with a ditch filled with branches of trees. In front, he lashed together a large number of carts to act as a defensive wall. Between two carts, breastworks were erected on which soldiers could rest their guns and fire. Babur called his device an Ottoman (Rumi) device, as it had been used by the Ottomans in their famous battle against Shah Ismail of Iran. Babur had also secured the services of two Ottoman master-gunners, Ustad Ali and Mustafa. The use of gunpowder had been gradually developing in India. Babur says that he used it for the first time in his attacks on the fortress of Bhira. Apparently, gunpowder was known in India, but its use for artillery became common in North India with the advent of Babur.

        Ibrahim Lodi had no idea of the strongly defended position of Babur. He had apparently expected Babur to fight in a mobile mode of warfare, which was usual for the Central Asians, making rapid advances or retreats as the need arose. After skirmishing for seven or eight days, Ibrahim Lodi’s forces came out for the fateful battle. Seeing the strength of Babur’s position, they hesitated. While Ibrahim was still reorganizing his forces, the two extreme wings of Babur’s army wheeled around and attacked Ibrahim’s forces from the side and rear.

        Babur’s gunners used their guns with good effect from the front. However, Babur gives a large part of the credit for his victory to his bowmen. Curiously, he makes little reference to Ibrahim’s elephants. Apparently, Ibrahim had little time to use them.

        Despite these early setbacks, Ibrahim Lodi’s army fought valiantly. The battle raged for two or three hours. Ibrahim Lodi fought to the last, with a group of 5,900–6,000 people around him. It is estimated that, besides him, more than 15,000 of his men were killed in the battle.

        The Battle of Panipat is regarded as one of the decisive battles of Indian history. It broke the back of Lodi power and brought under Babur’s control the entire area up to Delhi and Agra. The treasures stored up by Ibrahim Lodi at Agra relieved Babur from his financial difficulties. The rich territory up to Jaipur also lay open to Babur. However, Babur had to wage two hard-fought battles, one against Rana Sanga of Mewar and the other against the eastern Afghans, before he could consolidate his hold on this area. Viewed from this angle, the Battle of Panipat was not as decisive in the political field as has been made out. Its real importance lies in the fact that it opened a new phase in the struggle for domination in North India.

        The difficulties Babur faced after his victory at Panipat were manifold. Many of his begs (nobles) were not prepared for a long campaign in India. With the onset of the hot weather, their misgivings increased. They were far away from home in a strange and hostile land. Babur tells us that the people of India displayed ‘remarkable hostility,’ abandoning their villages at the approach of the Mughal armies. Obviously, the memories of Timur’s sacking and plundering of towns and villages were still fresh in their minds.

        Babur knew that the resources in India alone would enable him to found a strong empire and satisfy his begs. ‘Not for us the poverty of Kabul again!’ he records in his diary. He thus took a firm stand, proclaiming his intention to stay in India, and granting leave to a number of his begs who wanted to go back to Kabul. This immediately cleared the air. But it also invited the hostility of Rana Sanga, who began his preparations for a showdown with Babur.

    The Battle of Khanwa (1527)
        The growing conflict between Rana Sanga and Ibrahim Lodi for the domination of eastern Rajasthan and Malwa has already been mentioned. After defeating Mahmud Khalji of Malwa, the influence of the Rana had gradually extended up to Piliya Khar—a small river near Agra. The establishment of an empire in the Indo-Gangetic valley by Babur was a threat to Rana Sanga. Sanga began preparations to expel Babur or, at any rate, to confine him to the Punjab.

        Babur accuses Rana Sanga of breaching an agreement. He says that Sanga had invited him to India and promised to join him against Ibrahim Lodi, but made no move while he (Babur) conquered Delhi and Agra. We do not know what precise promises Sanga had made. He might have hoped for a prolonged warfare during which he (Sanga) would have been able to seize the areas he coveted. Or, he might have hoped that, like Timur, Babur would withdraw after sacking Delhi and weakening the Lodis. Babur’s decision to stay in India completely changed the situation.

        Many Afghans, including Mahmud Lodi, a younger brother of Ibrahim Lodi, rallied to Rana Sanga, in the hope of regaining the throne of Delhi in case Sanga won. Hasan Khan Mewati, the ruler of Mewat, also joined forces with Sanga. Almost all the Rajput rulers of note sent contingents to serve under Rana Sanga.

        The reputation of Rana Sanga, and his early success against some of the outlying Mughal posts such as Bayana, demoralized Babur’s soldiers. To rally them, Babur solemnly declared the war against Sanga to be a jihad. On the eve of the battle, he emptied all the wine jars and broke the wine flasks to demonstrate what a staunch Muslim he was. He also banned the sale and purchase of wine throughout his dominions and abolished customs taxes for Muslims.

        Having carefully selected a site, Babur entrenched himself at Khanwa, about 40 km from Agra. As at Panipat, he lashed together a number of wagons as an outer bastion and dug a trench in front for double protection. Gaps were left in the defenses for his musketeers to fire and advance behind wheeled tripods.

        The Battle of Khanwa (1527) was fiercely contested. According to Babur, Sanga’s forces exceeded 200,000, including 10,000 Afghan cavalrymen, and an equal force fielded by Hasan Khan Mewati. As usual, these figures may be greatly exaggerated, though Babur’s forces were undoubtedly inferior in number. Sanga made fierce attacks on Babur’s right and almost breached it. However, the Mughal artillery took a heavy toll of life, and slowly, Sanga’s forces were pushed back. At this juncture, Babur ordered his soldiers in the center, who had been sheltering behind their tripods, to launch an attack. The artillery also advanced behind the chained wagons. As at Panipat, Babur’s flanking parties, which attacked from the side and rear, also came into play. Sanga’s forces were thus hemmed in, and were defeated after a great slaughter. Rana Sanga escaped and wanted to renew the conflict with Babur, but he was poisoned by his own nobles, who considered such a course dangerous and suicidal.

        Thus died one of the most valiant warriors produced by Rajasthan. With Sanga’s death, the dream of a united Rajasthan extending up to Agra received a serious setback.

        The Battle of Khanwa secured Babur’s position in the Delhi-Agra region. Babur strengthened his position further by conquering a chain of forts—Gwalior, Dholpur, etc., east of Agra. He also annexed large parts of Alwar from Hasan Khan Mewati. He then led a campaign against Medini Rai of Chanderi in Malwa. Chanderi was captured after the Rajput defenders had died fighting to the last man, and their women performed jauhar. Babur had to cut short his plan of further campaigns in the area on hearing of the growing activities of the Afghans in eastern Uttar Pradesh.

    THE AFGHANS
        Although the Afghans had been defeated, they had not reconciled themselves to Mughal rule. Eastern Uttar Pradesh was still under the domination of the Afghan chiefs who had pledged allegiance to Babur but were prepared to throw it off at any time. The Afghan sardars were being backed by Nusrat Shah, the ruler of Bengal, who had married a daughter of Ibrahim Lodi. Earlier, the Afghans had ousted the Mughal officials in eastern Uttar Pradesh and had reached as far as Kanauj. However, their greatest weakness was the lack of a popular leader. After some time, Mahmud Lodi, a brother of Ibrahim Lodi, who had fought against Babur at Khanwa, reached Bihar. The Afghans hailed him as their ruler and mustered strong support under him.

        This was a threat that Babur could not ignore. Hence, at the beginning of 1529, he left Agra for the east. Crossing the Ganga near Banaras, he faced the combined forces of the Afghans and Nusrat Shah of Bengal at the crossing of the river Ghagra. Although Babur crossed the river and compelled the Bengal and Afghan armies to retreat, he could not win a decisive victory. Being ill and anxious about the situation in Central Asia, Babur decided to patch up an agreement with the Afghans. He put forward a vague claim for suzerainty over Bihar but left most of it in the hands of the Afghan chiefs. He also patched up a treaty with Nusrat Shah of Bengal. Babur then returned to Agra. Shortly afterward, Babur died near Lahore while on his way to Kabul.

        SIGNIFICANCE OF BABUR’S ADVENT INTO INDIA

        Babur’s advent into India was significant from many points of view. For the first time since the downfall of the Kushan Empire, Kabul and Qandhar became integral parts of an empire comprising north India. Since these areas had always acted as staging places for invasions of India, by dominating them, Babur and his successors were able to provide India security from external invasions for almost 200 years. Economically, the control of Kabul and Qandhar strengthened India’s foreign trade, as these two towns were starting points for caravans destined for China in the east and the Mediterranean seaports in the west. Thus, India could take a greater share in the great trans-Asian trade.

        In north India, Babur smashed the power of the Lodis and the Rajput confederacy led by Rana Sanga, thereby destroying the balance of power in the area. This was a major step toward the establishment of an all-India empire. However, several conditions still had to be fulfilled before this could be achieved.

        Babur introduced a new mode of warfare in India. Although gunpowder was known in India earlier, Babur demonstrated what a skilled combination of artillery and cavalry could achieve. His victories led to the rapid popularization of gunpowder and artillery in India. Since artillery was expensive, it favored those rulers who had large resources at their command. Hence, the era of small kingdoms ended.

        Through his new military methods and his personal conduct, Babur re-established the prestige of the Crown, which had been eroded since the death of Firuz Tughlaq. Although Sikandar Lodi and Ibrahim Lodi had tried to re-establish the prestige of the Crown, Afghan ideas of tribal independence and equality had resulted only in partial success. Babur had the prestige of being a descendant of two of the most famous warriors of Asia—Changez and Timur. None of his nobles could, therefore, claim a status equal to his or aspire to his throne. The challenge to his position, if any, could come only from a Timurid prince.

        Babur endeared himself to his begs through his personal qualities. He was always prepared to share the hardships with his soldiers. Once, at the height of winter, Babur was returning to Kabul. The snow was so deep that horses would sink into it, and parties of soldiers had to trample the snow so that the horses could pass. Without hesitation, Babur joined in the back-breaking task. Following Babur’s example, his begs also joined in the task.

        Babur was fond of wine and good company and was a good and merry companion. At the same time, he was a stern disciplinarian and a hard taskmaster. He took good care of his begs and was prepared to excuse many of their faults as long as they were not disloyal. He was prepared to adopt the same attitude towards his Afghan and Indian nobles. However, he did have a streak of cruelty, probably inherited from his ancestors, as he made towers of skulls from the heads of his opponents on a number of occasions. These, and other instances of personal cruelty, must be seen in the context of the harsh times in which Babur lived.

        An orthodox Sunni, Babur was not bigoted or led by the religious divines. At a time when there was a bitter sectarian feud between the Shias and the Sunnis in Iran and Turan, his court was free from theological and sectarian conflicts. He declared the battle against Sanga a jihad and assumed the title of ghazi after the victory, but the reasons were clearly political. Though his reign was a period of war, only a few instances can be found of the destruction of temples. There is no evidence that the mosques built at Sambhal and Ayodhya by the local governors were built by breaking the Hindu temples there. Perhaps, they only repaired existing mosques and put in an inscription in honor of Babur.

        Babur was deeply learned in Persian and Arabic and is regarded as one of the two most famous writers in the Turkish language, which was his mother tongue. As a prose writer, he had no equal, and his famous memoirs, the Tuzuk-i-Baburi, are considered one of the classics of world literature. His other works include a masnavi and the Turkish translation of a well-known Sufi work. He was in touch with the famous poets and artists of the time and describes their works in his memoirs. He was a keen naturalist and described the flora and fauna of India in considerable detail. He laid out a number of formal gardens with running water, thereby establishing a tradition of building gardens.

        Babur introduced a new concept of the state, which was to be based on the strength and prestige of the Crown, the absence of religious and sectarian bigotry, and the careful fostering of culture and the fine arts. He thus provided a precedent and direction for his successors.

    Humayun’s Conquest of Gujarat and His Struggle with Sher Shah
        Humayun succeeded Babur in December 1530 at the young age of 23. He had to grapple with a number of problems left behind by Babur. The administration had not yet been consolidated, and the finances were precarious. The Afghans had not been subdued and were nursing the hope of expelling the Mughals from India. Finally, there was the ‘Timurid legacy’ of partitioning the empire among all the brothers. Babur had counseled Humayun to deal kindly with his brothers but had not favored the partitioning of the infant Mughal empire, which would have been disastrous.

        When Humayun ascended the throne at Agra, the empire included Kabul and Gandhar, while there was also control over Badakhshan beyond the Hindukush mountains. Kabul and Qandhar were under the charge of Humayun’s younger brother, Kamran. It was only natural that these should remain in his charge. However, Kamran was not satisfied with these poverty-stricken areas. He marched on Lahore and Multan and occupied them. Humayun, who was busy elsewhere and did not want to start a civil war, had little option but to agree. Kamran accepted the suzerainty of Humayun and promised to help him whenever necessary. Kamran’s action created the apprehension that the other brothers of Humayun might also follow the same path whenever an opportunity arose. However, by formally granting Punjab and Multan to Kamran, Humayun had the immediate advantage of being free to devote his attention to the eastern parts, without having to worry about his western frontier.

        Apart from these issues, Humayun had to deal with the rapid growth of the power of the Afghans in the east and the growing power of Bahadur Shah, the ruler of Gujarat. At the outset, Humayun was inclined to consider the Afghan danger to be the more serious of the two. In 1532, at a place called Dadrah, he defeated the Afghan forces, which had conquered Bihar and overrun Jaunpur in eastern Uttar Pradesh. After this success, Humayun besieged Chunar. This powerful fort commanded the land and the river route between Agra and the east and was known as the gateway to eastern India. It had recently come into the possession of an Afghan sardar, Sher Khan, who had become the most powerful of the Afghan sardars.

        After the siege of Chunar had gone on for four months, Sher Khan persuaded Humayun to allow him to retain possession of the fort. In return, he promised to be loyal to the Mughals and sent one of his sons to Humayun as a hostage. Humayun accepted the offer because he was anxious to return to Agra. The rapid increase in the power of Bahadur Shah of Gujarat, and his activities in the areas bordering Agra, had alarmed him. He was not prepared to continue the siege of Chunar under the command of a noble, as that would have meant dividing his forces.

        Bahadur Shah, who was almost the same age as Humayun, was an able and ambitious ruler. Ascending the throne in 1526, he first overran and conquered Malwa. He then turned to Rajasthan and besieged Chittor. Soon, he reduced the Rajput defenders to sore straits. According to some later legends, Rani Karnavati, the widow of Rana Sanga, sent a request to Humayun seeking his help, and Humayun gallantly responded. No contemporary writer has mentioned the story, so it may not be true. However, it is a fact that Humayun moved from Agra to Gwalior, and due to fear of Mughal intervention, Bahadur Shah patched up a treaty with the Rana, leaving the fort in his hands after extracting a large indemnity in cash and kind.

        During the next year and a half, Humayun spent his time building a new city at Delhi, which he named Dinpanah. He organized many grand feasts and festivities during this period. Humayun has been blamed for wasting valuable time in these activities, while Sher Khan was steadily augmenting his power in the east. It has also been said that Humayun’s inactivity was due to his habit of taking opium. Neither of these charges is entirely true. Babur had continued to use opium after he gave up wine, and Humayun took opium occasionally in place of or in addition to wine, as did many of his nobles. But neither Babur nor Humayun was an opium addict. The building of Dinpanah was meant to impress friends and foes alike. It could also serve as a second capital in case Agra was threatened by Bahadur Shah, who, in the meantime, had conquered Ajmer and overrun eastern Rajasthan.

        Bahadur Shah offered an even greater challenge to Humayun. He had made his court the refuge of all those who feared or hated the Mughals. He again invested Chittor and, simultaneously, supplied arms and men to Tatar Khan, a cousin of Ibrahim Lodi. Tatar Khan was to invade Agra with a force of 40,000, while diversions were to be made in the north and east.

        Humayun easily defeated the challenge posed by Tatar Khan. The Afghan forces melted away at the approach of the Mughals, and Tatar Khan was defeated and killed. Determined to end the threat from Bahadur Shah once and for all, Humayun now invaded Malwa.

        In the struggle that followed, Humayun showed considerable military skill and remarkable personal valor. Bahadur Shah did not dare face the Mughals. He abandoned Chittor, which he had captured, and fortified himself at a camp at Mandsor. But Humayun’s cautious tactics forced him to flee to Mandu after spiking his guns, leaving behind all his rich equipment. Humayun was hot on his heels. He invested the fortress of Mandu and captured it without much opposition. Bahadur Shah fled from Mandu to Champaner. A small party scaled the fort of Champaner by a path considered inaccessible. Humayun was the first man to scale the walls. Bahadur Shah now fled to Ahmedabad and finally to Kathiawar. Thus, the rich provinces of Malwa and Gujarat, as well as the large treasures hoarded by the Gujarat rulers at Mandu and Champaner, fell into the hands of Humayun.

        Both Gujarat and Malwa were lost as quickly as they had been gained. After the victory, Humayun placed Gujarat under the command of his younger brother, Askari, and then retired to Mandu, which was centrally located and enjoyed a fine climate. The major problem was the deep attachment of the people to Gujarati rule. Askari was inexperienced, and the Mughal nobles were divided. A series of popular uprisings, military actions by Bahadur Shah’s nobles, and the rapid revival of Bahadur Shah’s power unnerved Askari. He fell back upon Champaner but received no help from the commander of the fort, who doubted his intentions. Hence, Askari decided to return to Agra. This immediately raised the fear that he might try to displace Humayun from Agra or attempt to carve out a separate empire for himself. Deciding to take no chances, Humayun abandoned Malwa and moved after Askari by forced marches. He overtook Askari in Rajasthan, the two brothers were reconciled, and they returned to Agra. Meanwhile, both Gujarat and Malwa were lost.

        The Gujarat campaign was not a complete failure. While it did not add to the Mughal territories, it destroyed forever the threat posed to the Mughals by Bahadur Shah. Humayun was now in a position to concentrate all his resources in the struggle against Sher Khan and the Afghans. Soon after, Bahadur Shah drowned in a scuffle with the Portuguese on board one of their ships. This ended whatever danger remained from the side of Gujarat.

    SHER KHAN
        During Humayun’s Malwa campaign (February 1535 to February 1537), Sher Khan had further strengthened his position. He had made himself the unquestioned master of Bihar. The Afghans from far and near had rallied around him. Though he continued to profess loyalty to the Mughals, he systematically planned to expel them from India. He was in close touch with Bahadur Shah, who had helped him with heavy subsidies. These resources enabled him to recruit and maintain a large and efficient army, which included 1,200 elephants. Shortly after Humayun’s return to Agra, Sher Khan used this army to defeat the Bengal king and compel him to pay an indemnity of 1,300,000 dinars (gold coins).

        After equipping a new army, Humayun marched against Sher Khan and besieged Chunar towards the end of the year. Humayun felt it would be dangerous to leave such a powerful fort behind, threatening his line of communication. However, the fort was strongly defended by the Afghans. Despite the best efforts of the master-gunner, Rumi Khan, it took six months for Humayun to capture it. Meanwhile, Sher Khan captured, by treachery, the powerful fort of Rohtas, where he could leave his family in safety. He then invaded Bengal for a second time and captured Gaur, its capital.

        Thus, Sher Khan completely outmaneuvered Humayun. Humayun should have realized that he was in no position to offer a military challenge to Sher Khan without more careful preparations. However, he was unable to grasp the political and military situation facing him. After his victory over Gaur, Sher Khan made an offer to Humayun that he would surrender Bihar and pay an annual tribute of ten lakhs of dinars if he was allowed to retain Bengal. It is not clear how far Sher Khan was sincere in making this offer. But Humayun was not prepared to leave Bengal to Sher Khan. Bengal was the land of gold, rich in manufactures, and a center for foreign trade. Moreover, the king of Bengal, who had reached Humayun’s camp in a wounded condition, urged that resistance to Sher Khan was still continuing. All these factors led Humayun to reject Sher Khan’s offer and decide on a campaign to Bengal. Soon after, the Bengal king succumbed to his wounds. Humayun had, thus, to undertake the campaign to Bengal all alone.

        Humayun’s march to Bengal was the prelude to the disaster which overtook his army at Chausa almost a year later. Sher Khan had left Bengal and was in south Bihar. He let Humayun advance into Bengal without opposition so that he might disrupt Humayun’s communications and bottle him up in Bengal. Arriving at Gaur, Humayun quickly took steps to establish law and order. But this did not solve any of his problems. His situation was worsened by the attempt of his younger brother, Hindal, to assume the crown himself at Agra. Due to this and Sher Khan’s activities, Humayun was totally cut off from all news and supplies from Agra.

        After a stay of three to four months at Gaur, Humayun started back for Agra, leaving a small garrison behind. Despite the rumblings of discontent in the nobility, the rainy season, and the constant harrying attacks of the Afghans, Humayun managed to get his army back to Chausa near Buxar without any serious loss. This was a big achievement for which Humayun deserves credit. Meanwhile, Kamran had advanced from Lahore to Agra to quell Hindal’s rebellion. Though not disloyal, Kamran made no attempt to send reinforcements to Humayun, which might have swung the military balance in favor of the Mughals.

        Despite these setbacks, Humayun was still confident of success against Sher Khan. He forgot that he was facing an Afghan army, which was very different from the one a year before. It had gained battle experience and confidence under the leadership of the most skillful general the Afghans ever produced. Misled by an offer of peace from Sher Khan, Humayun crossed to the eastern bank of the Karamasa River, giving full scope to the Afghan horsemen encamped there to attack. Humayun showed not only bad political sense but bad generalship as well. He chose his ground badly and allowed himself to be taken unawares.

        Humayun barely escaped with his life from the battlefield, swimming across the river with the help of a water carrier. Immense booty fell into Sher Khan’s hands. About 7,000 Mughal soldiers and many prominent nobles were killed.

        After the defeat at Chausa (March 1539), only the fullest unity among the Timurid princes and the nobles could have saved the Mughals. Kamran had a battle-hardened force of 10,000 troops under his command at Agra, but he was not prepared to loan them to Humayun as he had lost confidence in Humayun’s generalship. On the other hand, Humayun was not prepared to entrust the command of the armies to Kamran, lest the latter use it to assume power himself. The suspicions between the brothers grew until Kamran decided to return to Lahore with the bulk of his army.

        The army hastily assembled by Humayun at Agra was no match against Sher Khan. However, the battle of Kanauj (May 1540) was bitterly contested. Both of Humayun’s younger brothers, Askari and Hindal, fought valiantly but to no avail.

        The battle of Kanauj decided the issue between Sher Khan and the Mughals. Humayun, now, became a prince without a kingdom, with Kabul and Qandhar remaining under Kamran. He wandered about in Sindh and its neighboring regions for the next two and a half years, hatching various schemes to regain his kingdom. But neither the rulers of Sindh nor Maldeo, the powerful ruler of Marwar, were prepared to help him in this enterprise. Worse, his own brothers turned against him and tried to have him killed or imprisoned. Humayun faced all these trials and tribulations with fortitude and courage. It was during this period that Humayun’s character showed itself at its best. Ultimately, Humayun took shelter at the court of the Iranian king, and with his help, recaptured Qandhar and Kabul in 1545.

        It is clear that the major cause of Humayun’s failure against Sher Khan was his inability to understand the nature of Afghan power. Due to the existence of large numbers of Afghan tribes scattered over north India, the Afghans could always reunite under a capable leader and pose a challenge. Without winning over the local rulers and zamindars to their side, the Mughals were bound to remain numerically inferior. In the beginning, Humayun was, on the whole, loyally served by his brothers. Real differences among them arose only after Sher Khan’s victories. Some historians have unduly exaggerated the early differences of Humayun with his brothers, and his alleged faults of character. Though not as vigorous as Babur, Humayun showed himself to be a competent general and politician until his ill-conceived Bengal campaign. In both the battles with Sher Khan, the latter showed himself to be a superior general.

        Humayun’s life was a romantic one. He went from riches to rags, and again from rags to riches. In 1535, following the breakup of the Sur empire, he was able to recover Delhi. But he did not live long enough to enjoy the fruits of the victory. He died from a fall from the first floor of the library building in his fort at Delhi. His favorite wife built a magnificent mausoleum for him near the fort. This building marks a new phase in the style of architecture in north India, its most remarkable feature being the magnificent dome of marble.

    Sher Shah and the Sur Empire (1540-55)
        Sher Shah ascended the throne of Delhi at the age of around 54. We do not know much about his early life. His original name was Farid, and his father was a small jagirdar in Jaunpur. Farid gained valuable administrative experience by managing his father’s jagir. After the defeat and death of Ibrahim Lodi and the ensuing confusion in Afghan affairs, he emerged as one of the most important Afghan sardars. The title “Sher Khan” was bestowed upon him by his patron for either killing a tiger (sher) or for services rendered. Soon, Sher Khan became the right-hand man of the ruler of Bihar and its de facto master, before the death of Babur. Sher Khan’s rise to prominence, therefore, was not sudden.

        As a ruler, Sher Shah governed the mightiest empire that had existed in north India since the time of Muhammad bin Tughlaq. His empire stretched from Bengal to the Indus, excluding Kashmir. In the west, he conquered Malwa and nearly the entire Rajasthan. Malwa was in a weakened and distracted state and unable to offer much resistance. It was during the Malwa campaign that an episode occurred which tarnishes Sher Shah’s legacy. Puran Mal, the owner of the strong fort of Chanderi, had vacated the fort based on a promise of safe conduct. However, he and his 1,000 Rajput followers, along with their families, were treacherously attacked and killed outside the fort. The theologians of the time ruled that no faith need be kept with an infidel, and that Puran Mal deserved punishment for oppressing Muslims and harboring Muslim women in his house.

        The situation in Rajasthan was different. Maldeo, the ruler of Marwar, who had ascended the throne in 1532, rapidly brought the entire western and northern Rajasthan under his control. He expanded his territories during Humayun’s conflict with Sher Shah. With the help of the Bhatis of Jaisalmer, he conquered Ajmer. In his conquests, he came into conflict with neighboring rulers, including Mewar. His most recent conquest was Bikaner, where the ruler was killed after gallant resistance. His sons, Kalyan Das and Bhim, sought refuge at Sher Shah’s court, along with other figures like Biram Deo of Merta, who had been dispossessed by Maldeo.

        Maldeo’s ambition to create a centralized state in Rajasthan was seen as a threat by the rulers of Delhi and Agra. While it was believed that Maldeo commanded an army of 50,000, there is no evidence that he sought to conquer Delhi or Agra. The ongoing contention between the two powers was over the domination of strategically important eastern Rajasthan.

        In 1544, Rajput and Afghan forces clashed at Samel, located between Ajmer and Jodhpur. After waiting for about a month, Maldeo, realizing that attacking the well-fortified Afghan camp without strong artillery would be suicidal, decided to retreat to Jodhpur and Siwana for better defenses. Divided counsel and suspicions of disloyalty among some of his sardars, possibly fueled by Sher Shah’s ruse of dropping letters addressed to Rajput commanders near Maldeo’s camp, led to Maldeo withdrawing the bulk of his forces. Some Rajput sardars refused to retreat, and with a force of about 10,000, they launched a vigorous attack on Sher Shah’s center, causing confusion in his ranks. However, superior numbers and Afghan gunfire led to the defeat of the Rajputs.

        The battle of Samel sealed Rajasthan’s fate. Sher Shah besieged and conquered Ajmer and Jodhpur, forcing Maldeo to take refuge in the fort of Siwana, where he died shortly thereafter. Sher Shah then turned his attention to Mewar. The Rana was unable to resist and sent the keys to Chittor to Sher Shah, who established his outposts up to Mount Abu.

        Thus, within a short span of ten months, Sher Shah overran nearly the entire Rajasthan. His final campaign was against Kalinjar, a strong fort that held the key to Bundelkhand. During the siege, a gun exploded and severely injured Sher Shah, and he died in 1545 after hearing that the fort had been captured.

        Sher Shah was succeeded by his second son, Islam Shah, who ruled until 1553. Islam Shah was a capable ruler and general, but much of his focus was on the rebellions caused by his brothers and the tribal feuds among the Afghans. These, coupled with the constant fear of a Mughal invasion, prevented Islam Shah from expanding his empire. His premature death sparked a civil war among his successors, providing Humayun with the opportunity to recover his empire in India. In two fiercely contested battles in 1555, Humayun defeated the Afghans and regained Delhi and Agra.

        Contributions of Sher Shah
            The Sur Empire may be considered in many ways as a continuation and culmination of the Delhi Sultanate, with the advent of Babur and Humayun serving as an interregnum. Among Sher Shah’s most significant contributions was the re-establishment of law and order across his empire. He dealt sternly with robbers, dacoits, and zamindars who refused to pay land revenue or disobeyed government orders. Abbas Khan Sarwani, Sher Shah’s historian, tells us that the zamindars were so cowed down that none dared to rebel against him or harass travelers passing through their territories.

            Sher Shah also focused on fostering trade, commerce, and improving communication throughout his kingdom. He restored the old imperial road known as the Grand Trunk Road, which stretched from the Indus River in the west to Sonargaon in Bengal. He also built a road from Agra to Jodhpur and Chittor, linking it with roads to Gujarat’s seaports. Another road connected Lahore to Multan, which served as a staging point for caravans traveling to West and Central Asia. To facilitate travelers, Sher Shah built sarais (inns) at intervals of about eight kilometers along these roads. The sarais were fortified lodging places where travelers could rest and secure their goods. Separate accommodations were provided for Hindus and Muslims, and Brahmins were appointed to provide food and bedding for Hindu travelers and grain for their horses. Sher Shah built 1,700 sarais, some of which still exist today, demonstrating their strength. These roads and sarais were vital in facilitating trade and commerce, and many sarais evolved into market towns. The sarais also served as stages for the dak-chowki (news service).

            Sher Shah introduced reforms to promote trade and commerce, including a customs system where customs duties were paid only at two locations: Sikrigali in Bengal for goods from Bengal and Bihar, and the Indus for goods from West and Central Asia. No other customs levies were allowed at roads, ferries, or towns. Sher Shah also made efforts to treat merchants and travelers with respect, ensuring that if a merchant died, their property would not be seized.

            Sher Shah’s currency reforms played a crucial role in the growth of commerce and handicrafts. He minted high-quality gold, silver, and copper coins of uniform standards, replacing the debased coins of earlier periods. His silver rupee became the standard currency for centuries. His efforts to standardize weights and measures also facilitated trade and commerce.

            Sher Shah continued the administrative divisions from the Sultanate period. A pargana, comprising several villages, was overseen by the shiqdar (administrator) and the munsif (revenue officer). Above the pargana was the sarkar, managed by the shiqdar-i-shiqdaran and a munsif-i-munsifan. It seems that only the titles of these officers were new, as the pargana and sarkar were units of administration in earlier periods.

            Sher Shah’s centralization of power in his hands was both a strength and a weakness. Though he worked tirelessly and often toured the empire to understand the people’s conditions, his over-centralization led to difficulties after his death. The central machinery of administration, developed during the Sultanate period, continued under his rule.

            Sher Shah’s land revenue system was carefully structured. He insisted on measuring the land before determining the state’s share, which was set at one-third of the produce. The peasants had the option of paying in either cash or kind, though cash was preferred. The areas sown, the types of crops, and the amount each peasant had to pay were written on a document called “patea,” ensuring transparency. A cess was also levied to guard against famine and natural calamities.

            Sher Shah was deeply concerned with the welfare of the peasantry. He understood that oppressing them would lead to the desertion of villages, which could harm the entire country. This understanding helped limit the exploitation of peasants by rulers.

            Sher Shah established a strong army, recruiting soldiers directly and ensuring they had proper records. His army included 150,000 cavalry, 25,000 infantry, 5,000 elephants, and a park of artillery. He set up cantonments throughout the empire and maintained strong garrisons.

            Sher Shah was also focused on justice. He said, “Justice is the most excellent of religious rites,” and did not spare oppressors, regardless of their rank. Village panchayats and zamindars dealt with local civil and criminal cases, but Sher Shah also appointed qaadis to administer justice in various regions.

            Islam Shah, Sher Shah’s son and successor, made further reforms, including codifying laws to remove the need for special interpreters of Islamic law. He also attempted to curb the powers of the nobles and to pay soldiers in cash. However, most of his reforms disappeared after his death.

            There is no doubt that Sher Shah was a remarkable figure. He established a sound system of administration during his brief reign of five years. He was also a great builder. The tomb he built for himself at Sasaram during his lifetime is regarded as one of the masterpieces of architecture. It is considered the culmination of the earlier style of architecture and the starting point for the new style that developed later.

            Sher Shah also built a new city on the banks of the Yamuna near Delhi. The only survivor of this city is the Old Fort (Purana Qila) and the fine mosque within it.

            Sher Shah also patronized learned men. Some of the finest works in Hindi, such as the Padmavat of Malik Muhammad Jaisi, were completed during his reign.

            Sher Shah was not a bigot in the religious sphere, as is evident from his social and economic policies. Neither Islam Shah nor he depended on the ulama, though they respected them greatly.

            Religious slogans were sometimes used to justify political actions. The treacherous murder of Puran Mal and his associates after he had vacated the fort of Raisen in Malwa on the basis of a binding oath is one such example. Sher Shah did not, however, initiate any new liberal policies. Jizyah continued to be collected from the Hindus, and his nobility was drawn almost exclusively from the Afghans.

            Thus, the state under the Surs remained an Afghan institution based on race and tribe. A fundamental change came about only with the emergence of Akbar.


- Consolidation of the Mughal Empire: The Age of Akbar
    When Humayun was retreating from Bikaner, he was gallantly offered shelter and help by the Rana of Amarkot. It was at Amarkot, in 1542, that Akbar, the greatest of the Mughal rulers, was born. When Humayun fled to Iran, young Akbar was captured by his uncle, Kamran. He treated the child well on the whole. Akbar was reunited with his parents after the capture of Qandhar. When Humayun died, Akbar was at Kalanaur in Punjab, commanding against the Afghan rebels there. He was crowned at Kalanaur in 1556 at the young age of thirteen years and four months.

    Akbar succeeded to a difficult position. The Afghans were still strong beyond Agra, regrouping their forces under the leadership of Hemu for a final showdown. Kabul had been attacked and besieged. Sikandar Sur, the defeated Afghan ruler, was loitering in the Siwalik Hills. However, Bairam Khan, the tutor of the prince and a loyal and favorite officer of Humayun, rose to the occasion. He became the Wakil of the kingdom, with the title of Khan-i-Khanan, and rallied the Mughal forces. The threat from the side of Hemu was considered the most serious. The area from Chunar to the border of Bengal was under the domination of Adil Shah, a nephew of Sher Shah. Hemu, who had started life as a superintendent of markets under Islam Shah, had rapidly risen under Adil Shah. He had not lost a single one of the twenty-two battles in which he had fought. Adil Shah had appointed him the war leader with the title of Vikramajit and entrusted him with the task of expelling the Mughals. Hemu captured Agra, and with an army of 50,000 cavalry, 500 elephants, and a strong artillery, he marched upon Delhi.

    In a well-contested battle, Hemu defeated the Mughals near Delhi and occupied the city. However, Bairam Khan took energetic steps to meet the situation. His bold stand put heart into his army, and it marched on Delhi before Hemu could consolidate his position. The battle between the Mughals and the Afghan forces led by Hemu took place once again at Panipat (5 November 1556). Although Hemu’s artillery had been captured earlier by a Mughal detachment, the tide of battle was in favor of Hemu when an arrow hit him in the eye and he fainted. The leaderless Afghan army was defeated, and Hemu was captured and executed. Thus, Akbar had virtually to reconquer his empire.

    Early Tasks—Confrontation with the Nobles (1556-67)
        Bairam Khan remained at the helm of affairs of the empire for almost four years. During this period, he kept the nobility fully under control. The danger to Kabul was averted, and the territories of the empire were extended from Kabul up to Jaunpur in the east and Ajmer in the west. Gwalior was captured, and forces were sent to conquer Ranthambhor and Malwa.

        Meanwhile, Akbar was approaching the age of maturity. Bairam Khan had offended many powerful persons while he held supreme power. They complained that Bairam Khan was a Shia, and that he was appointing his own supporters and Shias to high offices while neglecting the old nobles. These charges were not very serious in themselves because Bairam was known for his liberal religious views. However, Bairam Khan had become arrogant and failed to realize that Akbar was growing up. There was friction on small points which made Akbar realize that he could not leave the affairs of the state in someone else’s hands for any length of time.

        Akbar played his cards deftly. He left Agra on the pretext of hunting and reached Delhi. From Delhi, he issued a farman dismissing Bairam Khan from his office and calling upon all the nobles to come and submit to him personally. Once Bairam Khan realized that Akbar wanted to take power into his own hands, he was prepared to submit, but his opponents were keen to ruin him. They heaped humiliation upon him until he was goaded to rebel. The rebellion distracted the empire for almost six months. Finally, Bairam Khan was forced to submit. Akbar received him cordially and gave him the option of serving at the court or anywhere outside it, or retiring to Mecca. Bairam Khan chose to go to Mecca. However, on his way, he was assassinated at Patan near Ahmedabad by an Afghan who bore him a personal grudge. Bairam’s wife and young child were brought to Akbar at Agra. Akbar married Bairam Khan’s young wife, who was his cousin. He brought up Bairam’s child as his own son. This child later became famous as Abdur Rahim Khan-i-Khanan and held some of the most important offices and commands in the empire.

        Akbar’s confrontation with Bairam Khan and the treatment accorded to his family subsequently show some typical traits of Akbar’s character. He was unrelenting once he had made up his mind about a course of action, but was prepared to go out of his way in being generous to an opponent who had submitted to him.

        During Bairam Khan’s rebellion, groups and individuals in the nobility had become politically active. They included Akbar’s foster mother, Maham Anaga, and her relations. Though Maham Anaga soon withdrew from politics, her son, Adham Khan, was an impetuous young man who assumed independent airs when sent to command an expedition against Malwa. Removed from command, he laid claim to the post of the wazir, and when this was not conceded, he stabbed the acting wazir in his office. Akbar was enraged and had him thrown down to his death from the parapet of the fort (1561).

        However, it was many years before Akbar was to establish his authority fully. The Uzbeks formed a powerful group in the nobility. They held important positions in eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, and Malwa. Although they had served the empire well by subduing the powerful Afghan groups in those areas, they had become arrogant and were defying the young ruler. Between 1561 and 1567, they broke out in rebellion several times, forcing Akbar to take the field against them. Each time Akbar was induced to pardon them. When they again rebelled in 1565, Akbar was so exasperated that he vowed to make Jaunpur his capital until he had rooted them out. Meanwhile, a rebellion by the Mirzas, who were Timurids and related to Akbar by marriage, threw the areas west of modern Uttar Pradesh into confusion. Encouraged by these rebellions, Akbar’s half-brother, Mirza Hakim, who had seized control of Kabul, advanced into Punjab and besieged Lahore. The Uzbek rebel nobles formally proclaimed him their ruler.

        This was the most serious crisis Akbar had to face since Hemu’s capture of Delhi. However, Akbar’s grit and a certain amount of luck enabled him to triumph. From Jaunpur, he marched to Lahore, forcing Mirza Hakim to retire. Meanwhile, the rebellion of the Mirzas was crushed, with the Mirzas fleeing to Malwa and then to Gujarat. Akbar marched back from Lahore to Jaunpur. Crossing the river Yamuna near Allahabad at the height of the rainy season, he surprised the rebels led by the Uzbek nobles and completely routed them (1567). The Uzbek leaders were killed in the battle, thus bringing their protracted rebellion to an end. All the rebellious nobles, including those among them who had been dreaming of independence, were cowed down. Akbar was now free to concentrate on the expansion of the empire.

    Early Expansion of the Empire (1560-76)
        During Bairam Khan’s regency, the territories of the Mughal empire expanded rapidly. Apart from Ajmer, an important conquest during this period was that of Malwa. Malwa was ruled at that time by a young prince, Baz Bahadur. His accomplishments included a mastery of music and poetry. Stories about the romance of Baz Bahadur and Rupmati, who was famous for her beauty as well as for music and poetry, are well known. During his time, Mandu had become a celebrated center for music. However, the army had been neglected by Baz Bahadur. The expedition against Malwa was led by Adham Khan, the son of Akbar’s foster mother, Maham Anga. Baz Bahadur was badly defeated in 1561, and the Mughals took valuable spoils, including Rupmati. However, she preferred to commit suicide rather than be dragged to Adham Khan’s harem. Due to the senseless cruelties of Adham Khan and his successor, there was a reaction against the Mughals, which enabled Baz Bahadur to recover Malwa.

        After dealing with Bairam Khan’s rebellion, Akbar sent another expedition to Malwa. Baz Bahadur had to flee, and for some time, he took shelter with the Rana of Mewar. After wandering about from one area to another, he finally repaired to Akbar’s court and was enrolled as a Mughal mansabdar. The extensive country of Malwa thus came under Mughal rule.

        At about the same time, Mughal arms overran the kingdom of Garh-Katanga. The kingdom of Garh-Katanga included the Narmada valley and the northern portions of present-day Madhya Pradesh. It had been welded together by Aman Das, who flourished in the second half of the fifteenth century. Aman Das had helped Bahadur Shah of Gujarat in the conquest of Raisen and had received from him the title of Sangram Shah.

        The kingdom of Garh-Katanga included a number of Gond and Rajput principalities. It was the most powerful kingdom established by the Gonds. It is said that the ruler commanded 20,000 cavalry, a large infantry, and 1,000 elephants. However, we do not know to what extent these figures are dependable. Sangram Shah had further strengthened his position by marrying his son to a princess of the famous Chandel rulers of Mahoba. This princess, who is famous as Durgavati, became a widow soon afterward. But she installed her minor son on the throne and ruled the country with great vigor and courage. She was a good marksman, both with guns and bow and arrow. She was fond of hunting, and according to a contemporary, “it was her custom that whenever she heard that a tiger had appeared, she did not drink water until she had shot it.” She fought many successful battles against her neighbors, including Baz Bahadur of Malwa. These border conflicts apparently continued even after Malwa had been conquered by the Mughals. Meanwhile, the cupidity of Asaf Khan, the Mughal governor of Allahabad, was roused by the stories of the fabulous wealth and beauty of the rani. Asaf Khan advanced with 10,000 cavalry from the side of Bundelkhand. Some of the semi-independent rulers of Garha found it a convenient moment to throw off the Gond yoke. The rani was thus left with a small force. Though wounded, she fought on gallantly. Finding that the battle was lost and that she was in danger of being captured, she stabbed herself to death. Asaf Khan then stormed the capital, Chauragarh, near modern Jabalpur.

        “So much plunder in jewels, gold, silver, and other things were taken that it is impossible to compute even a fraction of it,” says Abul Fazl. “Out of all the plunder, Asaf Khan sent only two hundred elephants to the court, and retained all the rest for himself.” Kamaladevi, the younger sister of the rani, was sent to the court.

        When Akbar had dealt with the rebellion of the Uzbek nobles, he forced Asaf Khan to disgorge his illegal gains. He restored the kingdom of Garh-Katanga to Chandra Shah, the younger son of Sangram Shah, after taking ten forts to round off the kingdom of Malwa.

    Rajasthan and Gujarat
        During the next ten years, Akbar brought the major part of Rajasthan under his control and also conquered Gujarat and Bengal. A major step in his campaign against the Rajput states was the siege of Chittor. This redoubtable fortress, which had faced a number of sieges in its history, was considered a key to central Rajasthan. It commanded the shortest route from Agra to Gujarat. Above all, it was a symbol of the Rajput spirit of resistance. Akbar realized that without conquering Chittor, he could not induce the other Rajput rulers to accept his suzerainty. Chittor fell in 1568 after a gallant siege of six months. At the advice of his nobles, Rana Udai Singh had retired to the hills, leaving the famous warriors Jaimal and Patta in charge of the fort. Many peasants from the surrounding area had also taken shelter within the fort and actively aided the defenders. When the Mughals stormed the fort, these peasants and many of the Rajput warriors, amounting to 30,000, were massacred—the first and the last time Akbar indulged in such a carnage. The Rajput warriors died after extracting as much vengeance as possible. In honor of the gallant Jaimal and Patta, Akbar ordered that two stone statues of these warriors, seated on elephants, be erected outside the chief gate of the fort at Agra.

        The fall of Chittor was followed by the conquest of Ranthambhor, reputed to be the most powerful fortress in Rajasthan. Jodhpur had been conquered earlier. As a result of these victories, most of the Rajput rajas, including those of Bikaner and Jaisalmer, submitted to Akbar. Only Mewar continued to resist.

        Gujarat had been in a sorry state of affairs since the death of Bahadur Shah. The fertility of its soil, its highly developed crafts, and its importance as the center of the import-export trade with the outside world had made it a prize worth fighting for. Akbar also laid claim to it because Humayun had ruled over it for some time. An additional reason was that the Mirzas, who had failed in their rebellion near Delhi, had taken shelter in Gujarat. Akbar was not prepared for such a rich province to become a rival center of power. In 1572, Akbar advanced on Ahmedabad via Ajmer. Ahmedabad surrendered without a fight. Akbar then turned his attention to the Mirzas who held Broach, Baroda, and Surat. At Cambay, Akbar saw the sea for the first time and rode on it in a boat. A group of Portuguese merchants also came and met him for the first time. The Portuguese dominated the Indian seas by this time and had ambitions of establishing an empire in India. Akbar’s conquest of Gujarat frustrated these designs.

        While Akbar’s armies were besieging Surat, Akbar crossed the river Mahi and assaulted the Mirzas with a small body of 200 men, which included Man Singh and Bhagwant Das of Amber. For some time, Akbar’s life was in danger. But the impetuosity of his charge routed the Mirzas. Thus, Gujarat came under Mughal control. However, as soon as Akbar had turned his back, rebellions broke out all over Gujarat. Hearing the news, Akbar marched out of Agra and traversed across Rajasthan in nine days by means of camels, horses, and carts. On the eleventh day, he reached Ahmedabad. In this journey, which normally took six weeks, only 3,000 soldiers were able to keep up with Akbar. With these, he defeated an enemy force of 20,000 in 1573.

        After this, Akbar turned his attention to Bengal. The Afghans had continued to dominate Bengal and Bihar. They had also overrun Orissa and killed its ruler. However, in order not to give offense to the Mughals, the Afghan ruler had not formally declared himself king but read the khutbah in Akbar’s name. Internal fights among the Afghans and the declaration of independence by the new ruler, Daud Khan, gave Akbar the excuse he was seeking. Akbar advanced with a strong flotilla of boats accompanying him. The Afghan king was believed to possess a large army consisting of 40,000 well-mounted cavalry, an infantry of about 1,50,000, several thousand guns and elephants, and a strong flotilla of war boats. If Akbar had not been as careful, and the Afghans had a better leader, the contest between Humayun and Sher Shah might well have been repeated. Akbar first captured Patna, thus securing Mughal communications in Bihar. He then returned to Agra, leaving Khan-i-Khanan Munaim Khan, an experienced officer, in charge of the campaign. The Mughal armies invaded Bengal, and after hard campaigning, Daud was forced to sue for peace. He rose in rebellion soon afterward. Though the Mughal position in Bengal and Bihar was still weak, the Mughal armies were better organized and led. In a stiff battle in Bihar in 1576, Daud Khan was defeated and executed on the spot.

        Thus ended the last Afghan kingdom in northern India. It also brought to an end the first phase of Akbar’s expansion of the empire.

    ADMINISTRATION
        During the decade following the conquest of Gujarat, Akbar found time to address the administrative problems of the empire. The system of administration developed by Sher Shah had fallen into confusion after the death of Islam Shah. Therefore, Akbar had to start afresh.

        One of the most important issues facing Akbar was the land revenue administration. Sher Shah had instituted a system where the cultivated area was measured and a crop rate (ray) was established, fixing the dues of the peasant crop-wise based on land productivity. This schedule was updated every year into a central schedule of prices. Akbar adopted Sher Shah’s system, but it was soon found that the fixing of a central schedule of prices often led to significant delays, resulting in great hardships for the peasantry, as the prices fixed were generally those prevailing at the imperial court, which were higher than those in the countryside. Consequently, peasants had to give up a larger share of their produce.

        Initially, Akbar reverted to an annual assessment system. The gantngos, who were hereditary holders of land as well as local officials familiar with local conditions, were ordered to report on actual produce, state of cultivation, local prices, etc. However, in many areas, the gantngos were dishonest and concealed the true produce. The annual assessments also caused great difficulty for both the peasants and the state. After returning from Gujarat in 1573, Akbar paid personal attention to the land revenue system. Officials called Agroris were appointed across northern India. They were responsible for collecting a crore of dams (Rs 2,50,000) and also verified the facts and figures supplied by the gantngos. Based on the information provided regarding actual produce, local prices, productivity, etc., Akbar instituted a new system in 1580 called the dahsala. Under this system, the average produce of different crops, as well as the average prices prevailing over the past ten years, were calculated. One-third of the average produce was the state’s share. The state demand was, however, stated in cash, converting the state share into money based on the average prices over the past decade. Thus, the produce of a digha of land under share was given in maunds, but based on average prices, the state demand was fixed in rupees per digha.

        Later, further improvements were made. Not only were local prices considered, but parganas with similar productivity were grouped into separate assessment circles. As a result, the peasant was required to pay based on both local productivity and local prices.

        The system had several advantages. As soon as the area sown by the peasant had been measured using bamboos linked with iron rings, both the peasants and the state knew what the dues were. The peasant was granted remission in land revenue if crops failed due to drought, floods, etc. The system of measurement and the assessment based on it is called the zaéti system. Akbar introduced this system in areas from Lahore to Allahabad, as well as in Malwa and Gujarat. The dahsala system was an advancement of the zaéti system.

        A number of other systems of assessment were also used under Akbar. The most common, and perhaps the oldest, was called bazai or ghalla-bakhsht. In this system, the produce was divided between the peasants and the state in a fixed proportion. The crop was divided after it had been thrashed, or when it had been cut and tied in stacks, or while still standing in the field. This system was considered very fair, but it required a large number of honest officials to be present at the time of ripening or reaping the crops.

        The peasants were allowed to choose between zadti and atat under certain conditions. Such a choice was offered when the crops had been ruined. Under atat, the peasants could choose to pay in cash or in kind, though the state preferred cash. For crops like cotton, indigo, oilseeds, sugarcane, etc., the state demand was invariably in cash, and hence these were considered cash crops.

        A third system widely used during Akbar’s reign was sasaq. This was a rough calculation of the amount payable by the peasant based on what he had been paying in the past. Some modern historians believe it was merely a system of computing the peasant’s past dues, not a different system of assessment. Others think it involved rough appraisement based on crop inspection and past experience, fixing the amount to be paid by the village as a whole. It was also referred to as hankut or estimation.

        Other local methods of assessment continued in certain areas.

        In fixing the land revenue, continuity of cultivation was considered. Land that remained under cultivation almost every year was called polaj. Land that was left uncultivated was referred to as paradi (fallow). Paradi land paid at the full (pola) rate when cultivated. Land left fallow for two to three years was called chachar, and land left fallow for longer than that was called danjar. These were assessed at concessional rates, with the revenue demand gradually rising until the full or pola rate was paid in the fifth or eighth year. In this way, the state encouraged bringing uncultivated wasteland under cultivation. Land was further classified into good, middling, and bad. One-third of the average produce was the state’s demand, but it varied depending on the land’s productivity and the assessment method.

        Akbar was deeply interested in the improvement and expansion of cultivation. He instructed the amil (revenue officer) to act like a father to the peasants. The amil was to advance loans (called saccavi) to peasants for seeds, implements, animals, etc., in times of need and to recover them in easy installments. He was to encourage peasants to plough as much land as possible and sow superior-quality crops. The zamindars of the area were also urged to cooperate in this effort. The zamindar had a hereditary right to a share of the produce, and the peasants too had a hereditary right to cultivate their land and could not be evicted as long as they paid the land revenue.

        The dahsala system was not a ten-year settlement, nor was it permanent. The state retained the right to modify it. However, with some changes, Akbar’s settlement remained the basis of the Mughal Empire’s land revenue system until the end of the seventeenth century. The zaéti system is associated with Raja Todar Mal and is sometimes called Todar Mal’s bandodas. Todar Mal was a brilliant revenue officer who had initially served under Sher Shah. However, he was just one member of a team of brilliant revenue officials who came to prominence under Akbar. The dahsala system was the result of their combined efforts.

    Mansabdari System and the Army
        Akbar would not have been able to expand his empire and maintain his hold over it without a strong army. To achieve this, it was necessary for him to organize both the nobility and his army. Akbar realized both these objectives through the Mansabdari system. Under this system, every officer was assigned a rank (mansab). The lowest rank was 10, and the highest was 5000 for the nobles. Princes of the blood received higher mansabs. Towards the end of Akbar’s reign, the highest rank a noble could attain was raised from 5000 to 7000, and two premier nobles of the empire, Mirza Aziz Koka and Raja Man Singh, were honored with the rank of 7000 each. This limit was retained until the end of Aurangzeb’s reign.

        The mansab system under Akbar developed gradually. Initially, there was only one rank (mansab). From the fortieth year (1594-95), the ranks were divided into two—zat and sawar. The word “zat” refers to personal status. It fixed the personal status of a person and the salary due to him. The sawar rank indicated the number of cavalrymen (sawars) a person was required to maintain. A person required to maintain as many sawars as his zat rank was placed in the first category of that rank; if he maintained half or more, then in the second category, and if he maintained less than half, then in the third category. Thus, there were three categories in every rank (mansab).

        Great care was taken to ensure that the sawars recruited by the nobles were experienced and well-mounted. For this purpose, a descriptive roll (chehra) of the soldier was maintained, and his horse was branded with the imperial marks. This was called the Dagh system. Every noble had to bring his contingent for periodic inspection before persons appointed by the emperor for the purpose.

        The horses were carefully inspected, and only good quality horses of Arabic and Iraqi breeds were employed. Ideally, for every ten cavalrymen, the mansabdar had to maintain twenty horses. This was because horses had to be rested while on march, and replacements were necessary during times of war. A sawar with only one horse was considered to be only half a sawar. The Mughal cavalry force remained efficient as long as the 10-20 rule was adhered to.

        Provision was made that the contingents of the nobles should be mixed, i.e., drawn from all groups—Mughal, Pathan, Hindustani, and Rajput. Thus, Akbar tried to weaken the forces of tribalism and parochialism. Only Mughal and Rajput nobles were allowed to have contingents exclusively of Mughals or Rajputs, but in course of time, mixed contingents became the general rule.

        Apart from cavalrymen, bowmen, musketeers (bandukchi), sappers, and miners were also recruited in the contingents. The salaries varied. The average salary of a sawar was Rs 20 per month. Iranis and Turanis received a higher salary than Rajputs and Hindustanis (Indian Muslims). An infantryman received about Rs 3 per month. The salary due to the soldiers was added to the salary of the mansabdar, who was paid by assigning him a jagir. Sometimes, mansabdars were paid in cash. It is wrong to think that Akbar disliked the jagir system and tried to do away with it, but failed as it was too deeply entrenched. A jagir did not confer any hereditary rights on the holder or disturb any of the existing rights in the area. It only meant that the land revenue due to the state was to be paid to the jagirdar.

        The mansabdari system, as it developed under the Mughals, was a distinctive and unique system that did not have any exact parallel outside India. The origins of the mansabdari system can perhaps be traced back to Chinggis Khan, who organized his army on a decimal basis, with the lowest unit of command being ten, and the highest ten thousand (mang). The Mongol system influenced, to some extent, the military system of the Delhi Sultanate, as we hear of commanders of hundred (sedis) and one thousand (azaras). Under the Surs, we have nobles who were designated commanders of 20,000, 10,000, or 5,000 sawars. However, we do not know the system that was prevalent under Babur and Humayun.

        Persons holding ranks below 500 were called mansabdars; those from 500 to below 2500 were called amirs; and those holding ranks of 2500 and above were called amir-i-umda or amir-i-azam. However, the word mansabdar is sometimes used for all three categories. Apart from status, this classification had significance: an amir or an amir-i-umda could have another amir or mansabdar serve under him, but a mansabdar could not do so. Thus, a person with a rank of 5000 could have under him a mansabdar up to a rank of 500, and one with a rank of 4000 could have a mansabdar up to a rank of 400 zat, and so on.

        The categories were not rigid. Persons were generally appointed to a low mansab and gradually promoted depending on their merits and the favor of the emperor. A person could also be demoted as a mark of punishment. Thus, there was only one service including both army men and civilians. People who entered service at the lower rung of the ladder could hope to rise to the position of an amir or even amir-i-umda. To that extent, careers were open to talent.

        In addition to meeting his personal expenses, the mansabdar had to maintain, out of his salary, a stipulated quota of horses, elephants, beasts of burden (camels and mules), and carts. Thus, a mansabdar holding a zat rank of 5000 had to maintain 340 horses, 100 elephants, 400 camels, 100 mules, and 160 carts. Later, these were maintained centrally, but the mansabdar had to pay for them out of his salary. The horses were classified into six categories, and the elephants into five according to quality, with the number and quality of horses and elephants carefully prescribed. This was because horses and elephants of high breed were greatly prized and were considered indispensable for an efficient military machine. Cavalry and elephants, in fact, formed the main basis of the army in those days, though artillery was rapidly becoming more important. The transport corps was vital for making the army more mobile.

        For meeting these expenses, the Mughal mansabdars were paid handsomely. A mansabdar with a rank of 5000 could receive a salary of Rs 30,000 per month, a mansabdar of 3000 Rs 17,000, and one of 1000 Rs 8,200 per month. Even a humble seddi holding a rank of 100 could receive Rs 7,000 per year. Roughly, a quarter of these salaries were spent on meeting the cost of the transport corps. Even then, the Mughal mansabdars formed the highest-paid service in the world.

        Akbar kept a large body of cavalrymen as his bodyguards. He maintained a big stable of horses. He also maintained a body of gentleman troopers (zhadis). These were persons of noble lineage who did not have the means to raise a contingent or who had impressed the emperor. They were allowed to keep eight to ten horses and received a high salary of about Rs 800 a month. They were answerable only to the emperor and had a separate muster-master. These people could be compared to the knights of medieval Europe.

        Akbar was very fond of horses and elephants. He also maintained a strong park of artillery. Akbar was especially interested in guns. He devised detachable guns that could be carried on an elephant or a camel. There were also heavy siege guns for breaching forts. Some of these were so heavy that 100 or 200 oxen and several elephants were needed to pull them. A strong park of light artillery accompanied the emperor whenever he moved out of the capital.

        We do not know whether Akbar ever had plans to build a navy. The lack of a strong navy remained a key weakness of the Mughal empire. If Akbar had the time, he might have paid attention to it. He did, however, build an efficient flotilla of warboats which he used in his eastern campaigns. Some of the boats were over 30 meters long and displaced over 350 tons.

    ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT
        Hardly any changes were made by Akbar in the organization of local government. The pargana and the sarkar continued as before. The chief officers of the sarkar were the faujdar and the amaiguzar, the former being in charge of law and order, and the latter responsible for the assessment and collection of land revenue. The territories of the empire were divided into jagir, khalisa, and inam. Income from khalisa villages went directly to the royal exchequer. The inam lands were those allotted to learned and religious men. Jagirs were allotted to nobles and members of the royal family, including the queens. The amelguzar was required to exercise general supervision over all types of holdings to ensure that the imperial rules and regulations for the assessment and collection of land revenue were followed uniformly. Only autonomous rajas were left free to continue their traditional land revenue system in their territories. Even there, Akbar encouraged them to follow the imperial system.

        Akbar paid great attention to the organization of the central and provincial governments. His system of central government was based on the structure of government that had evolved under the Delhi Sultanate, but the functions of the various departments were carefully reorganized, and meticulous rules and regulations were laid down for the conduct of affairs. Thus, he gave a new shape to the system and breathed new life into it.

        The Central Asian and Timurid tradition was to have an all-powerful wazir, under whom various heads of departments functioned. He was the principal link between the ruler and the administration. In course of time, a separate department, the military department, had come into being. The judiciary had always been separate. Thus, in practice, the concept of an all-powerful wazir had been given up. However, in his capacity as wazir, Bairam Khan had exercised the powers of an all-powerful wazir.

        Akbar reorganized the central machinery of administration on the basis of the division of power between various departments and of checks and balances. While the post of wazir was not abolished, it was stripped of all power and became largely decorative. The post was given to important nobles from time to time, but they played little part in administration. The head of the revenue department continued to be the wazir. Under Akbar, generally, the wazir did not hold a high mansab. Many nobles held mansabs that were higher than his. Thus, he was no longer the principal adviser to the ruler but an expert in revenue affairs. To emphasize this point, Akbar generally used the title of diwan or diwan-i-ala in preference to the word wazir. Sometimes, several persons were asked to discharge the duties of diwan jointly. The diwan was responsible for all income and expenditure and held control over khalisa, jagir, and inam lands.

        The head of the military department was called the mir bakhshi. It was the mir bakhshi and not the diwan who was considered the head of the nobility. Therefore, only the leading grandees were appointed to this post. Recommendations for appointments to mansabs or for promotions, etc., were made to the emperor through the mir bakhshi. Once the emperor had accepted a recommendation, it was sent to the diwan for confirmation and for assigning a jagir to the appointee. The same procedure was followed in the case of promotions.

        The mir bakhshi was also the head of the intelligence and information agencies of the empire. Intelligence officers (arids) and news reporters (waqia-navis) were posted to all parts of the empire. Their reports were presented to the emperor at the court through the mir bakhshi.

        It will thus be seen that the diwan and the mir bakhshi were almost on par and supported and checked each other.

        The third important officer was the nur saiman. He was in charge of the imperial household, including the supply of all provisions and articles for the use of the inmates of the Aaram (the female apartments). Many of these articles were manufactured under supervision in royal workshops called arkadanas. Only nobles who enjoyed the complete confidence of the emperor were appointed to this office. The maintenance of etiquette at the court, the control of the royal bodyguard, etc., were all under the overall supervision of this officer.

        The fourth important department was the judicial department, headed by the chief gazi. This post was sometimes combined with that of the chief sadr, who was responsible for all charitable and religious endowments. Thus, it was a post that carried considerable power and patronage. It fell into bad odor due to the corruption and venality of Akbar’s chief gazi, Abdun Nabi.

        After instituting a careful scrutiny of the grants held by various persons, Akbar separated the crown lands from the jagir and khalisa lands, and divided the empire into six circles for the purposes of the grant of inam lands and their administration. Two features of the inam grants are noteworthy. First, Akbar made it a deliberate part of his policy to grant inam lands to all persons, irrespective of their religious faith and beliefs. Senads of grant to various Hindu marks made by Akbar are still preserved. Second, Akbar made it a rule that half of the inam land should consist of cultivable wasteland. Thus, the inam holders were encouraged to extend cultivation.

        In order to make himself accessible to the people as well as to the ministers, Akbar carefully divided his time. The day started with the emperor’s appearance at the Aaroka of the palace. A large number of people assembled daily to have a glimpse of the ruler and to present petitions to him if necessary. These petitions were attended to immediately or in the open darbar (diwan-i-am) which followed and lasted till midday. The emperor then retired to his apartments for meals and rest.

        Separate time was allotted to the ministers. For confidential consultations, the ministers were generally called to a chamber situated near Akbar’s bathing apartment (ghussaf Khana). In course of time, this private consultation chamber came to be called ghusal khana.

        Akbar divided the empire into twelve subas in 1580. These were Bengal, Bihar, Allahabad, Awadh, Agra, Delhi, Lahore, Multan, Kabul, Ajmer, Malwa, and Gujarat. A governor (subedar), a diwan, a bakhshi, a sadr, a gazi, and a waqia-navis were appointed to each of the provinces. Thus, orderly government based on the principle of checks and balances was extended to the provinces.

    Relations with the Rajputs
        Akbar’s relations with the Rajputs must be understood in the broader context of Mughal policy towards the powerful rajas and zamindars of India. When Humayun returned to India, he embarked on a deliberate policy of winning over these elements. Abul Fazl mentions that, in order “to soothe the minds of the zamindars, he entered into matrimonial relations with them.” Thus, when Jamal Khan Mewati, a cousin of Hasan Khan Mewati, one of the great zamindars of India, submitted to Humayun, he married one of Jamal Khan’s beautiful daughters himself and married the younger sister to Bairam Khan. Over time, Akbar expanded and elaborated upon this policy.

        Bhara Mai, the ruler of Amber, had come to Akbar’s court in Agra shortly after Akbar’s accession. He made a favorable impression on the young king, for when people were fleeing from a maddened elephant, the Rajputs under Bhara Mal had stood firm. In 1562, when Akbar was going to Ajmer, he learned that Bhara Mal was being harassed by the local Mughal governor. Bhara Mal paid personal homage to Akbar and cemented the alliance by marrying his younger daughter, Harkha Bai, to Akbar.

        Marriages between Muslim rulers and the daughters of Hindu potentates were not unusual. Many such alliances in various parts of the country during the 14th and 15th centuries have been cited earlier. Maldeo, the powerful ruler of Jodhpur, had married his daughter, Bai Kanaka, to Sultan Mahmud of Gujarat and another daughter, Lal Bai, to the Sur ruler, probably Islam Shah Sur. Bhara Mal himself had married his elder daughter to Haji Khan Pathan, who had been the de facto ruler of Alwar after the death of Islam Shah Sur. Most of these marriages, however, did not lead to stable personal relations between the concerned families. The girls were often lost to their families and never returned after marriage. Akbar followed a different policy: he gave complete religious freedom to his Hindu wives and honored their parents and relations in the nobility. Bhara Mal was made a high grandee. His son, Bhagwant Das, rose to the rank of 5000, and his grandson, Man Singh, to the rank of 7000. This rank was granted by Akbar only to one other noble, Aziz Khan Koka, his foster brother.

        Akbar emphasized his special relationship with the Kachhawaha ruler in other ways as well. The infant prince, Danyal, was sent to Amber to be raised by Bhara Mal’s wives. In 1572, when Akbar moved to Gujarat, Bhara Mal was placed in charge of Agra, where all the royal ladies resided—a signal honor, given only to nobles who were either relations or close confidants of the emperor.

        However, Akbar did not insist upon matrimonial alliances as a precondition. No matrimonial relations were entered into with the Hadas of Ranthambhor, yet they remained in high favor with Akbar. Rao Surjan Hada was placed in charge of Garh-Katanga and rose to the rank of 2000. Similarly, no matrimonial relations were entered into with the rulers of Sirohi and Banswara when they submitted to Akbar later on.

        Akbar’s Rajput policy was combined with a policy of broad religious toleration. In 1564, he abolished the jizya tax, which was sometimes used by the Muslim rulers to humiliate non-Muslims and was often seen as a symbol of Muslim domination. He had earlier abolished the pilgrim tax and the practice of forcible conversion of prisoners of war.

        Following the conquest of Chittor, most of the leading Rajput rulers accepted Akbar’s suzerainty and paid personal homage to him. The rulers of Jaisalmer and Bikaner also entered into matrimonial relations with Akbar. The only state that steadfastly refused to accept Mughal suzerainty was Mewar.

        Although Chittor and the surrounding plains came under Mughal domination, Udaipur and the hilly area that formed the larger part of Mewar remained under the control of the Rana. In 1572, Rana Pratap succeeded his father, Rana Udai Singh, to the throne. A series of embassies were sent by Akbar to persuade Rana Pratap to accept Mughal suzerainty and pay personal homage. These embassies, including the one led by Man Singh, were courteously received by the Rana. The story that he insulted Man Singh is not a historical fact, and is uncharacteristic of the Rana, who always behaved in a chivalrous and courteous manner, even towards his opponents.

        Man Singh’s embassy was followed by one under Bhagwant Das, and another under Raja Todar Mal. At one time, it seems that the Rana was prepared for a compromise. He put on the imperial robe sent by Akbar and sent his son, Amar Singh, to the court with Bhagwant Das to pay homage to Akbar and accept his service. But no final agreement could be reached as the proud Rana was not willing to accept Akbar’s demand for personal homage. Also, it seems that the Mughals wanted to keep hold of Chittor, which was unacceptable to the Rana.

        In early 1576, Akbar moved to Ajmer and deputed Raja Man Singh with a force of 5000 to lead a campaign against the Rana. In anticipation of this move, the Rana devastated the entire territory up to Chittor to deprive the Mughal forces of food and fodder. He also fortified all the passes in the hills. A furious battle was fought at Haldighati below a narrow defile leading to Kumbhalgarh, which was then the Rana’s capital. Apart from select Rajput forces, the Rana’s van consisted of an Afghan contingent led by Hakim Khan Sur. Thus, the Battle of Haldighati was not a struggle between Hindus and Muslims, or between Indians and foreigners. A small force of Bhils, whom the Rana had befriended, was also present. The Rana’s forces were put at 3000. The onslaught by the Rajputs and the Afghans threw the Mughal forces into disarray. But rumors that Akbar had arrived in person rallied the Mughal troops. With fresh reinforcements, the tide of the battle began to turn against the Rajputs. Seeing this, the Rana escaped. The Mughal forces were too tired to pursue him, but after some time, they advanced through the pass and occupied Gogunda, a strong point which had been evacuated by the Rana earlier.

        This was the last time the Rana engaged in a pitched battle with the Mughals. Henceforth, he resorted to methods of guerrilla warfare. The defeat at Haldighati did not weaken Rana Pratap’s resolve to fight for independence. However, the cause for which he stood had already been lost; most of the Rajput states had accepted Mughal suzerainty. By his policy of inducting Rajput rajas into Mughal service and treating them on par with Mughal grandees, according broad religious toleration to his subjects, and his courteous behavior toward his former opponents, Akbar succeeded in cementing his alliance with the Rajput rulers. Therefore, Rana Pratap’s refusal to bow before the Mughals had little effect on most other Rajput states, which realized that in the existing situation, it was impossible for small states to maintain complete independence. Moreover, by allowing a large measure of autonomy to the Rajput rajas, Akbar established an empire that the Rajputs did not consider harmful to their best interests.

        Rana Pratap’s defiance of the mighty Mughal empire, almost alone and unaided by the other Rajput states, constitutes a glorious saga of Rajput valor and the spirit of sacrifice for cherished principles. Rana Pratap’s method of sporadic warfare was later elaborated further by Malik Ambar, the Deccani general, and by Shivaji.

        It is not necessary to discuss in detail the struggle between Akbar and Rana Pratap. For some time, Akbar exerted relentless pressure on the Rana. The Mughals overran the states of Dungarpur, Banswara, Sirohi, etc., which were dependent allies of Mewar and had supported Rana Pratap. Akbar concluded separate treaties with these states, thus further isolating Mewar. The Rana was hunted from forest to forest and valley to valley. Both Kumbhalgarh and Udaipur were occupied by the Mughals. The Rana endured great hardships, but thanks to the support of the Bhil chiefs, he continued his defiance. The Mughal pressure relaxed after 1579 due to a serious revolt in Bihar and Bengal, in protest against some reforms introduced by Akbar. Akbar’s half-brother, Mirza Hakim, made an incursion into Punjab to take advantage of the situation. Thus, Akbar had to face a most serious internal crisis. In 1585, Akbar moved to Lahore to manage the situation in the northwest, which had become dangerous. He remained there for the next 12 years. No Mughal expedition was sent against Rana Pratap after 1585.

        Taking advantage of the situation, Rana Pratap recovered many of his territories, including Kumbhalgarh and areas near Chittor. But he could not recover Chittor itself. During this period, he built a new capital, Chavand, near modern Dungarpur. He died in 1597 at the young age of 51, due to an internal injury sustained while trying to draw a stiff bow.

        Apart from Mewar, Akbar had to face opposition in Marwar as well. Following the death of Maldeo in 1562, there was a dispute for succession between his sons. The younger son of Maldeo, Chandrasen, who was the son of Maldeo’s favorite queen, succeeded to the throne. Due to Mughal pressure, he had to give parts of his kingdom in patta to his elder brothers. But Chandrasen did not like this arrangement, and after some time, he rose in rebellion. Akbar then took Marwar under direct Mughal administration. One reason for this may have been his desire to safeguard the Mughal supply route to Gujarat, which passed through Jodhpur. After its conquest, Akbar appointed Rai Singh Bikaneri to oversee Jodhpur. Chandrasen resisted valiantly and waged guerrilla warfare, but eventually sought refuge in Mewar. He was hunted from place to place by the Mughals. He died in 1581. A couple of years later, Akbar conferred Jodhpur upon Udai Singh, the elder brother of Chandrasen. To strengthen his position, Udai Singh married his daughter, Jagat Gosain (also known as Jodha Bai), to Akbar’s eldest son, Salim. Unlike the earlier form of marriages, the bridegroom’s party went to the Raja’s house in a procession, and several Hindu practices were followed. This took place when Akbar was residing at Lahore.

        Akbar also had close personal relations with the rulers of Bikaner and Bundi, who served in various campaigns with distinction. In 1593, when the son-in-law of Rai Singh of Bikaner died due to a fall from his patki, Akbar personally visited the raja’s house to console him and dissuaded his daughter from performing sati, as her children were young.

        The Rajput policy of Akbar proved beneficial to both the Mughal state and the Rajputs. The alliance secured the services of the bravest warriors in India for the Mughal empire. The steadfast loyalty of the Rajputs became an important factor in the consolidation and expansion of the empire. The alliance ensured peace in Rajasthan and enabled the Rajputs to serve in far-flung parts of the empire without worrying about the safety of their homelands. By being enrolled into imperial service, important positions in the empire were open to the Rajput rajas. Thus, Bhagwant Das of Amber was appointed joint governor of Lahore, while his son, Man Singh, was appointed governor of Bihar and Bengal. Other Rajput rajas were placed in charge of strategic provinces such as Agra, Ajmer, and Gujarat at various times. As high grandees of the empire, they were granted jagirs in addition to their hereditary kingdoms, thus augmenting their resources.

        Akbar’s Rajput policy was continued by his successors, Jahangir and Shah Jahan. Jahangir, whose mother was a Rajput princess, had himself married a Kacchawaha princess as well as a Jodhpur princess. Princesses of the houses of Jaisalmer and Bikaner were also married to him. Jahangir gave positions of honor to the rulers of all these houses.

        The main achievement of Jahangir, however, was the settlement of the outstanding dispute with Mewar. Rana Pratap had been succeeded by his son, Amar Singh. Akbar had sent a series of expeditions against Amar Singh in order to force him to accept his conditions. Jahangir himself was sent against him twice, but achieved little. After his accession in 1605, Jahangir took up the matter energetically. Three successive campaigns were launched, but they could not break the rana’s will. In 1613, Jahangir himself reached Ajmer to direct the campaign. Prince Khurram (later Shah Jahan) was deputed with a large army to invade the mountainous parts of Mewar. The heavy pressure of the Mughal army, the depopulation of the country, and the ruination of agriculture at last produced their effect. Some sardars defected to the Mughals, and many others pressed the rana for peace. The rana’s son, Karan Singh, who was deputed to proceed to Jahangir’s court, was graciously received. Jahangir got up from the throne, embraced him in the darbar, and loaded him with gifts. To save the rana’s prestige, Jahangir did not insist upon the rana paying personal homage to him or entering the royal service. Prince Karan was accorded the rank of 5000, which had been earlier accorded to the rulers of Jodhpur, Bikaner, and Amber. He was to serve the Mughal emperor with a contingent of 1500 savars. All the territories of Mewar, including Chittor, were restored. However, due to the strategic importance of Chittor, it was stipulated that its fortifications would not be repaired.

        Thus, Jahangir completed the task begun by Akbar and further strengthened the alliance with the Rajputs.

    REBELLIONS AND FURTHER EXPANSION OF THE MUGHAL EMPIRE
        The new system of administration introduced by Akbar, as described above, involved tightening the administrative machinery, greater control over the nobles, and more attention to the interests of the people. It was, therefore, not to the liking of many nobles. Sentiments of regional independence were still strong, particularly in areas such as Gujarat, Bengal, and Bihar, all of which had a long tradition of forming separate kingdoms. In Rajasthan, Rana Pratap’s struggle for freedom was continuing as well. In this situation, Akbar had to deal with a series of rebellions. Gujarat remained in a state of unrest for two years due to a bid for freedom by a representative of the old ruling dynasty. The most serious rebellion during this period occurred in Bengal and Bihar, which extended to Jaunpur. The main cause of the rebellion was the strict enforcement of the dagh system (branding of the horses of the jagirdars) and strict accounting of their income. The discontent was fanned by some religious divines who were unhappy with Akbar’s liberal views and his policy of resuming the large revenue-free grants of land which had been obtained by them, sometimes illegally. Akbar’s half-brother, Mirza Hakim, the ruler of Kabul, also abetted the rebellion and held out the hope of invading the Punjab at a suitable time to help. A large number of Afghans in the eastern parts were sullen at the loss of Afghan power and were ever ready to join a rebellion.

        The rebellion kept the empire distracted for almost two years (1580-81), and Akbar was faced with a very difficult and delicate situation. Due to the mishandling of the situation by local officials, Bengal and almost the whole of Bihar passed into the hands of the rebels, who proclaimed Mirza Hakim as their ruler. They even got a religious divine to issue a fatwa, calling on the faithful to take the field against Akbar.

        Akbar did not lose his nerve. He dispatched a force under Todar Mal against Bihar and Bengal, and another under Raja Man Singh to check the expected attack by Mirza Hakim. Todar Mal proceeded with great vigor and tact and brought the situation in the east under control before Mirza Hakim’s invasion took place. Mirza Hakim advanced on Lahore with 15,000 horses but could not take the city due to the stout defense by Raja Man Singh and Bhagwant Das. His hopes that a large number of nobles in the Punjab would rebel and join him were also belied. Meanwhile, Akbar marched on Lahore with a well-disciplined force of 50,000 horses. Mirza Hakim had no option but to beat a hasty retreat.

        Akbar crowned his success by marching to Kabul in 1581. Since Mirza Hakim refused to accept Akbar’s suzerainty or to come and pay personal allegiance to him, and the Indian nobles and soldiers were becoming restive, Akbar handed over Kabul to his sister before returning to India. The handing over of a kingdom to a woman was symbolic of Akbar’s broad-mindedness and liberalism.

        Akbar’s triumph over his opponents was not only a personal success but also showed that the new system was beginning to strike roots. Akbar was now free to think of the further expansion of his empire. He was drawn to the Deccan, in which he had long been interested. But before he could do anything, the situation in the northwest claimed his attention again. Abdullah Khan Uzbek, the hereditary enemy of the Mughals, had been gradually gathering strength in Central Asia. In 1584, he overran Badakhshan, which had been ruled by the Timurids. Kabul appeared to be next on the list. Both Mirza Hakim and the Timurid princes ousted from Badakhshan now appealed to Akbar for help. But before he could act, Mirza Hakim died due to excessive drinking, leaving Kabul in a state of disturbance.

        Akbar now ordered Man Singh to march to Kabul and himself moved to Attok on the river Indus. In order to block all roads to the Uzbeks, he sent expeditions against Kashmir (1586) and against Baluchistan. The whole of Kashmir, including Ladakh and Baltistan (called Tibet Khurd and Tibet Buzurg), came under Mughal domination, and a daughter of the chief of Baltistan was married to young Salim. Expeditions were also sent to clear the Khyber Pass, which had been blocked by rebellious tribesmen. In an expedition against them, Raja Birbal, the favorite of Akbar, lost his life. But the Afghan tribesmen were gradually forced to submit.

        The consolidation of the northwest and fixing a scientific frontier for the empire were two of the major contributions of Akbar. His conquest of Sindh in 1590 also opened the trade routes down the river Indus for Punjab. Akbar stayed at Lahore until 1598 when the death of Abdullah Uzbek finally removed the threat from the side of the Uzbeks.

        After settling the affairs of the northwest, Akbar turned his attention towards the affairs of eastern and western India and the Deccan. Orissa, which was at the time under the domination of Afghan chiefs, was conquered by Raja Man Singh, who was the Mughal governor of Bengal. Man Singh also conquered Cooch-Bihar and parts of east Bengal, including Dacca. Mirza Aziz Koka, the foster-brother of Akbar, conquered Kathiawar in the west. Khan-i-Khanan Munim Khan was deputed to the Deccan along with Prince Murad. The developments in the Deccan would be dealt with in a separate chapter. Suffice it to say here that by the turn of the century, Mughal control had been extended up to Ahmadnagar, bringing the Mughals into direct contact with the Marathas for the first time.

        Thus, the political integration of north India had been achieved by the turn of the century, and the Mughals had started the penetration of the Deccan. But what was even more important, the cultural and emotional integration of the people within this vast empire had developed apace.

    Towards INTEGRATION: STATE, RELIGION, AND SOCIAL REFORMS
        We have seen how, during the fifteenth century, a number of rulers in different parts of the country tried to promote greater understanding between Hindus and Muslims by translating secular and religious literature in Sanskrit into Persian, by giving patronage to local languages and literature, by adopting a more liberal policy of religious toleration, and, in some cases, by giving important jobs—including service at the court and in the army—to Hindus. We have also seen how a remarkable series of popular saints, such as Kabir, Chaitanya, and Nanak, in different parts of the country, emphasized the essential unity of Islam and Hinduism, and laid stress on a religion based on love and devotion rather than one based on rituals or a literal interpretation of revealed books. They thus created the atmosphere in which liberal sentiments and views could grow, and religious narrowness began to be looked down upon. This was the atmosphere in which Akbar was born and reared.

        One of the first actions that Akbar took after he had assumed power was to abolish the poll tax or jizyah, which non-Muslims were required to pay in a Muslim state. Although it was not a heavy tax, it was disliked because it made a distinction between subjects. At the same time, Akbar abolished the pilgrim tax on bathing at holy places such as Prayag, Banaras, etc. He also abolished the practice of forcibly converting prisoners of war to Islam. This laid the essential foundation of an empire based on equal rights for all citizens, irrespective of their religious beliefs. The liberal principles of the empire were strengthened by bringing able Hindus into the nobility. While most of these were Rajput rajas, many of whom entered into matrimonial relations with Akbar, and with whom he had established personal relationships, mansabs were given to others also on the basis of their competence. Among the latter, the ablest and most well-known were Todar Mal, an expert in revenue affairs, who rose to the post of diwan, and Birbal, who was a personal favorite of the emperor. There were others, such as Rai Paw Das, entitled as Rai Bikramajit.

        Akbar’s attitude toward his Hindu subjects is closely linked with his views on how a sovereign should behave toward his subjects. These views, which have been carefully explained by Akbar’s biographer, Abul Fazl, were an amalgam of Timurid, Persian, and Indian ideas of sovereignty. According to Abul Fazl, the office of a true ruler was a very responsible one, which depended on divine illumination (fara-i-‘ized). Hence, no one could stand between God and a true ruler. A true ruler was distinguished by paternal love toward his subjects, without distinction of sect or creed, a large heart so that the wishes of great and small are attended to, and prayer and devotion with a daily increasing trust in God, who is considered the real ruler. It was also the duty of the ruler to maintain equilibrium in society by not allowing people of one rank or profession to interfere in the duties and obligations of another. Above all, he was not to allow the dust of sectarian strife to rise. All these together constituted what has been called the policy of seth-Aril or ‘peace to all’.

        Akbar was deeply interested in religion and philosophy. At the outset, Akbar was an orthodox Muslim. He paid great deference to the leading gazi of the state, Abdun Nabi Khan, who held the post of sadi-es-sadur. On one occasion, Akbar even carried his slippers for him. But by the time Akbar reached adulthood, mysticism, which was being preached across the country, began to influence him. We are told that he spent whole nights in thoughts of God, continually pronounced His name, and, out of a feeling of thankfulness for his success, he would sit many mornings alone in prayer and contemplation on a large flat stone of an old building near his palace in Agra. Gradually, he turned away from the path of narrow orthodoxy. He had already abolished the jizyah and pilgrim tax, as we have seen. He gathered at the court a band of talented people with liberal ideas. The most noted among them were Abul Fazl and his brother Faizi, who, along with their father (who was a noted scholar), had been persecuted by the mullahs for having sympathy with Mahdawi ideas, which the orthodox elements strongly opposed. Another was a Brahman, Mahesh Das, who was given the title of Raja Birbal and became a constant companion of Akbar.

        In 1575, Akbar built a hall called Ibadat Khana, or the Hall of Prayer, at his new capital, Fatehpur Sikri. To this, he called selected theologians, mystics, and courtiers and nobles known for their scholarship and intellectual attainments. Akbar discussed religious and spiritual topics with them. He frequently said, “My sole object, oh wise mullahs, is to ascertain truth, to find out and disclose the principles of genuine religion…” At first, the proceedings were confined to Muslims. They were hardly orderly. The mullahs wrangled, shouted, and abused each other even in the presence of the emperor. The behavior of the mullahs, their pride, and conceit in their learning disgusted Akbar and further alienated him from the mullahs.

        At this stage, Akbar opened the Ibadat Khana to people of all religions—Christians, Zoroastrians, Hindus, Jains, even atheists. This broadened the discussions, and debates began even on issues on which all Muslims were agreed, such as whether the Quran was the last revealed book and Muhammad its prophet, resurrection, the nature of God, etc. This horrified the theologians, and all kinds of rumors began to circulate about Akbar’s desire to forsake Islam. As modern historian R.P. Tripathi says, “The patience and open-mindedness of Akbar was construed in a variety of ways by persons of different faiths. Instead of bringing credit, the Ibadat Khana brought growing discredit.”

        At this time, an inquiry was conducted into the affairs of the Chief Sadr, Abdun Nabi, who was found to be extremely corrupt and tyrannical in his dealings with the distribution of charitable lands (madad-i-maash). He had amassed wealth in other corrupt ways as well. He was a bigot and had inflicted the punishment of death on Shias and a Brahman of Mathura for their beliefs. At first, Abdun Nabi was stripped of his power, and sadrs were appointed in every province for distributing charitable lands. Soon, he was dismissed and ordered to proceed to Mecca for Hajj. Around the same time, in 1580, a rebellion broke out in the east. A number of fatwas were issued by the gazi declaring Akbar to be a heretic. Akbar suppressed the rebellion and gave drastic punishment to the gazi.

        To further strengthen his position in dealing with the mullahs, Akbar issued a declaration or mahzar, which asserted that if there were conflicting views among those considered fit to interpret the Quran, i.e., the mujtahids, Akbar, by virtue of being ‘a most just and wise king’ and his rank being higher in the eyes of God than that of the mujtahids, was entitled to choose any one of the interpretations, which would be of ‘benefit to the nation and in the interests of good order.’ Further, if Akbar issued a new order ‘in conformity with the Quran and calculated to benefit the nation,’ all should be bound by it.

        The declaration, which was signed by the leading wazirs, had been wrongly called a “Decree of Infallibility.” Akbar claimed the right to choose only when there was a difference of opinion among those qualified to interpret the Quran. At a time when there were bloody conflicts between the Shias, Sunnis, and Mahdawis in different parts of the country, Akbar sought the widest toleration. There is little doubt that the mahzar had a salutary effect in stabilizing the religious situation in the empire.

        But Akbar was less successful in his effort to find common ground between the votaries of different religions in the country. The debates in the Ibadat Khana did not lead to a better understanding between different religions but rather to greater bitterness, as the representatives of each religion denounced the others and tried to prove that their religion was superior to the others. Hence, in 1582, Akbar discontinued the debates in the Ibadat Khana. But he did not give up his quest for truth. Even his bitter critic, Badayuni, says: “Night and day, people did nothing but inquire and investigate.” Akbar invited Purushottam and Devi to expound the doctrines of Hinduism, and Maharji Rana to explain the doctrines of Zoroastrianism. He met some Portuguese priests and, in order to understand Christian doctrines better, sent an embassy to Goa, requesting them to send two learned missionaries to his court. The Portuguese sent Aquaviva and Monserrate, who remained at Akbar’s court for almost three years and left a valuable account. However, their hope of converting Akbar to Christianity was never realized. Akbar came into contact with the Jains as well, and at his instance, the leading Jain saint of Kathiawar, Hira Vijaya Suri, spent a couple of years at Akbar’s court.

        Contacts with leaders of various religions, listening to their learned works, meetings with the Sufi saints and yogis gradually convinced Akbar that while there were differences of sect and creed, all religions had a number of good points which were obscured in the heat of controversy. He felt that if the good points of various religions were emphasized, an atmosphere of harmony and amity would prevail, which would be for the good of the country. Further, he felt that behind all the multiplicity of names and forms, there was but one God. As Badayuni observed, as a result of all the influences brought to bear on His Majesty, “there grew gradually, as the outline of a stone, the conviction in his heart that there were some sensible men in all religions. If some true knowledge was thus everywhere to be found, why should truth be confined to one religion?”

        Badayuni asserts that as a result, Akbar gradually turned away from Islam and set up a new religion compounded of many existing religions—Hinduism, Christianity, Zoroastrianism, etc. However, modern historians are not inclined to accept this view and think that Badayuni has exaggerated. There is little evidence to prove that Akbar intended or actually promulgated a new religion. The word used by Abul Fazl and Badayuni for the so-called new path was tawhid-i-ilahi, which literally means ‘Divine Monotheism’. The tawhid-i-ilahi was really an order of the Sufistic type. Those who were willing to join, and whom the emperor approved, were allowed to become members. Sunday was fixed as the day for initiation. The novice placed his head at the feet of the emperor, who raised him up and gave him the formula, called sas in Sufi terminology, which he was to repeat and concentrate upon. This contained Akbar’s favorite motto “Allah-o-Akbar” or “God is Great.” The initiates were to abstain from meat as far as possible, at least in the month of their birth, and give a sumptuous feast and alms on their birthday. There were no sacred books or scriptures, no priestly class, no place of worship or rituals and ceremonies, except for the initiation.

        Tawhid-i-Ilahi should not be confused with Akbar selecting a small group of trusted nobles who were totally devoted to him. According to Badayuni, those selected were to promise the sacrifice of property, life, honor, and religion. Giving up religion, apparently, meant giving up attachment to the narrow concepts and observances, which again, was in keeping with Sufi ideas. However, many leading nobles, including all the great Hindu nobles, except Birbal, declined to join. The number of this group, as far as we know, amounted to about eighteen only, while those who were enrolled as disciples of Akbar amounted to thousands. Akbar did not use force, nor was money used for enrolling disciples or murids.

        In enrolling murids, Akbar evidently had some political purpose as well. He wanted a band of nobles and others who would be personally loyal to him and support him in his concept of a state based on sulh-i-kul, i.e., equal toleration of and respect for all sections, irrespective of their religious beliefs. Orthodox elements, such as Badayuni, neither sympathized with nor supported such a state. Badayuni ascribes this move of Akbar to enroll disciples to his head being turned by many unworthy flatterers and panegyrists who suggested to him that he was the insan-i-kamil or the ‘Perfect Man’ of the age. It was at their instance that Akbar initiated the ceremony of prostration or kissing the floor before the sovereign, a ceremony previously reserved for God.

        There were many precedents of rulers trying to combine temporal and spiritual powers in their person. Abul Fazl says that it was natural for people to turn to their ruler for spiritual guidance and that Akbar was well-qualified to lead the people to spiritual bliss and to establish harmony among warring creeds.

        The tawhid-i-ilahi virtually died with Akbar, though the practice of enrolling murids and giving them a shast was continued for some time by Jahangir. However, Akbar’s attempt to tie the nobles to the emperor by personal bonds succeeded, and many nobles continued to pride themselves as being the anda or slaves, or murids of the emperor. Also, by and large, the nobles did not support elements propagating religious orthodoxy in social and political matters. However, the belief of looking upon the king as someone having miraculous powers, so that people could be cured by the king’s touch or by his breathing upon a pot of water, continued. Even an orthodox ruler such as Aurangzeb could not shake off this belief.

        Akbar tried to emphasize the concept of sulh-i-kul or peace and harmony among religions in other ways as well. He set up a large translation department for translating works in Sanskrit, Arabic, Greek, etc., into Persian. Thus, the Singhasan Battisi, the Atharva Veda, and the Bible were taken up first for translation. These were followed by the Mahabharata, the Gita, and the Ramayana. Many others, including the Panchatantra and works of geography, were also translated. The Quran was also translated into Persian, perhaps for the first time.

        Akbar also introduced a number of social and educational reforms. He stopped sati, the burning of a widow, unless she herself, of her own free will, persistently desired it. Widows of tender age who had not shared the bed with their husbands were not to be burnt at all. Widow remarriage was also legalized. Akbar was against anyone having more than one wife unless the first wife was barren. The age of marriage was raised to 14 for girls and 16 for boys. The sale of wines and spirits was restricted. Not all these steps were, however, successful. As we know, the success of social legislation depends largely on the willing cooperation of the people. Akbar was living in an age of superstition, and it seems that his social reforms had only limited success.

        Akbar also revised the educational syllabus, laying more emphasis on moral education and mathematics, and on secular subjects such as agriculture, geometry, astronomy, rules of government, logic, history, etc. He also gave patronage to artists, poets, painters, and musicians, so much so that his court became famous for the galaxy of renowned people known as the navaratna.

        Thus, under Akbar, the state became essentially secular, liberal, and enlightened in social matters, and a promoter of cultural integration.

    The Deccan and South India (Up to 1656)
        We mentioned in an earlier chapter that following the breakup of the Bahmani kingdom, three powerful states—Ahmadnagar, Bijapur, and Golconda—emerged on the scene, and that they combined to crush Vijayanagara at the Battle of Bannihati, near Talikota, in 1565. After the victory, the Deccani states resumed their old ways. Both Ahmadnagar and Bijapur claimed Shelapur, which was a rich and fertile tract. Neither wars nor marriage alliances between the two could resolve the issue. Both states had the ambition of conquering Bidar. Ahmadnagar also wanted to annex Berar in the north. In fact, as the descendants of the old Bahmani rulers, the Nizam Shahis claimed a superior, if not hegemonic, position in the Deccan. Their territorial claims were contested not only by Bijapur but also by the rulers of Gujarat, who had their eyes on the rich Konkan area, in addition to Berar. The Gujarat rulers actively aided Berar against Ahmadnagar and even engaged in war against Ahmadnagar to maintain the existing balance of power in the Deccan. Bijapur and Golconda also clashed over the possession of Naldurg.

        The Mughal conquest of Gujarat in 1572 created a new situation. The conquest of Gujarat could have been a prelude to the Mughal conquest of the Deccan, but Akbar was busy elsewhere and did not want to interfere in Deccan affairs at that stage. Ahmadnagar took advantage of the situation to annex Berar. In fact, Ahmadnagar and Bijapur came to an agreement whereby Bijapur was left free to expand its dominions in the south at the expense of Vijayanagara, while Ahmadnagar overran Berar. Golconda, too, was interested in extending its territories at the cost of Vijayanagara, which was divided into small nayakhoods. All the Deccani states, thus, were expansionist.

        Another feature of the situation was the growing importance of the Marathas in the affairs of the Deccan. As we have seen, the Maratha troops had always been employed as loose auxiliaries or jagirs (usually called sardars) in the Bahmani kingdom. The revenue affairs at the local level were in the hands of the Deccani Brahmins. Some of the old Maratha families which rose in the service of the Bahmani rulers and held mansabs and jagirs from them were the More, Nimbalkar, Ghatge, etc. Most of them were powerful zamindars or deshnukhs as they were called in the Deccan. However, unlike the Rajputs, none of them was an independent ruler or ruled over a large kingdom. Secondly, they were not the leaders of clans on whose backing and support they could depend. Hence, many of the Maratha sardars appear to have been military adventurers who were prepared to shift their loyalty according to the prevailing situation. Nevertheless, the Marathas formed the backbone of the landed aristocracy of the Deccan and had a position similar to the one held by the Rajputs in large parts of northern India.

        During the mid-sixteenth century, the rulers of the Deccan states embarked upon a definite policy of winning over the Marathas to their side. The Maratha chiefs were accorded service and positions in all three leading states of the Deccan. Ibrahim Adil Shah of Bijapur, who ascended the throne in 1535, was the leading advocate of this policy. It is said that he entertained 30,000 Maratha auxiliaries (sardars) in his army and showed great favor to the Marathas in the revenue system. He is also supposed to have introduced Marathi in revenue accounts at all levels. Apart from increasing his favors to old families, a few other families such as the Bhonsales (originally the Ghorpades), the Dafles (or Chavans), etc., also rose to prominence in Bijapur as a result of this policy. Maharashtrian Brahmins were regularly used for diplomatic negotiations as well. Thus, the title of Peshwa was accorded to a Maratha chief who played an important role in the states of Ahmadnagar and Golconda as well.

        It will thus be seen that the policy of allying with local landed classes, which were military-minded, had been initiated by the Deccani rulers even before such a policy was implemented by the Mughals under Akbar.

    Mughal Advance Towards the Deccan
        It was logical to expect a Mughal advance towards the Deccan after the consolidation of the empire in northern India. Although the Vindhyas divided the north and the south, they were not an insurmountable barrier. Travelers, merchandise, pilgrims, and wandering saints had always passed between the north and the south, making the two culturally one, though each had its own distinctive features. The conquest of the Deccan by the Tughlaqs and the improved communications between the north and the south had led to a strengthening of the commercial and cultural relations between the two. After the decline of the Delhi Sultanate, many Sufi saints and people in search of employment had migrated to the court of the Bahmani rulers. Politically, too, the north and south were not isolated. As we have seen, the rulers of Gujarat and Malwa in the west and Orissa in the east had been continually involved in the politics of south India. Hence, after the conquest of Malwa and Gujarat in the 1560s and early 1570s, the Mughals could hardly have kept themselves aloof from Deccan politics. In 1576, a Mughal army invaded Khandesh and compelled the ruler to submit. However, urgent matters called Akbar elsewhere. For twelve years, between 1586 and 1598, Akbar lived at Lahore, watching the northwest situation. In the meantime, affairs in the Deccan deteriorated.

        The Deccan was a seething cauldron of politics. War between the various Deccani states was a frequent occurrence. The death of a ruler often led to factional fights among the nobles, with each party trying to act as kingmaker. In this, hostility between the Deccanis and the newcomers (sardars or gharibs) found free play. Among the Deccanis, too, the Habshis (Abyssinians or Africans) and Afghans formed separate groups. These groups and factions had little contact with the life and culture of the people of the region. The process of the assimilation of the Marathas into the military and political system of the Deccani states, which had started earlier, did not make much headway. The rulers and nobles, therefore, commanded little loyalty from the people.

        The situation was worsened by sectarian conflicts and controversies. Towards the beginning of the century, Shiism became the state religion of Iran under the Safavid dynasty. Shiism had been a suppressed sect for a long time, and in the first flush of enthusiasm, its followers indulged in a great deal of persecution of their erstwhile opponents. As a result, members of many eminent families fled to India and sought shelter at the court of Akbar, who made no distinction between Shias and Sunnis. Some of the Deccani states, notably Golconda, adopted Shiism as the state creed. At the courts of Bijapur and Ahmadnagar, too, the Shiite party was strong but prevailed only intermittently. This resulted in heightened party strife.

        Mahdawi ideas had also spread widely in the Deccan. Muslims believed that in every epoch, a man from the family of the Prophet would make an appearance to strengthen the religion and establish justice. Such a person was called the Mahdi. Although many Mahdis had appeared in different countries at different times, the end of the first millennium of Islam, which coincided with the end of the sixteenth century, raised expectations throughout the Islamic world. In India, one Saiyid Muhammad, born at Jaunpur in the first half of the fifteenth century, proclaimed himself as the Mahdi. Saiyid Muhammad traveled widely throughout India and the Islamic world, creating great enthusiasm. He established his dairas (circles) in different parts of the country, including the Deccan, where his ideas found fertile soil. The orthodox elements were as bitterly opposed to Mahdawism as to Shiism, though there was little love lost between the two. It was in this context that Akbar had put forward the concept of sulah-i-kul (universal peace). He feared that the bitter sectarian rivalries prevailing in the Deccani states would spill over into the Mughal empire.

        Akbar was also apprehensive of the growing power of the Portuguese. The Portuguese had been interfering in pilgrim traffic to Mecca, not sparing even the royal ladies in their territories. They also carried out proselytizing activities, which Akbar disliked. They were constantly trying to expand their positions on the mainland and had even tried to seize Surat, which was saved by the timely arrival of a Mughal commander. Akbar apparently felt that coordinating and pooling the resources of the Deccani states under Mughal supervision would check, if not eliminate, the Portuguese threat.

        These were some of the factors that impelled Akbar to involve himself in the Deccan affairs.

    CONQUEST OF BERAR, AHMADNAGAR, AND KHANDESH
        Akbar claimed suzerainty over the entire country. He was, therefore, keen that, like the Rajputs, the rulers of the Deccani states should acknowledge his authority. However, embassies sent by him earlier, suggesting that the Deccani states recognize his overlordship and establish friendly relations, did not produce any positive results. It was evident that the Deccani states would not accept Mughal suzerainty until the Mughals were in a position to exert military pressure on them.

        In 1591, Akbar launched a diplomatic offensive. He sent embassies to all the Deccani states, ‘inviting’ them to accept Mughal suzerainty. As expected, none of the states complied, except for Khandesh, which was too close to the Mughals and vulnerable to resist. Burhan Nizam Shah, the ruler of Ahmadnagar, was rude to the Mughal envoy, while the other rulers only made vague promises of friendship. It became clear that Akbar was on the verge of making a decisive move in the Deccan. The necessary opportunity arose when factional fighting broke out among the Nizam Shahi nobles following the death of Burhan in 1595.

        There were four claimants to the throne, each backed by different factions. The strongest claim belonged to Bahadur, the son of the deceased ruler. Ibrahim Adil Shah II, the ruler of Bijapur, supported Bahadur’s claim. Chand Bibi, Burhan’s sister and the widow of a former ruler of Bijapur (who was Ibrahim Adil Shah’s uncle), was a remarkable woman. She had virtually ruled Bijapur for nearly ten years when Ibrahim Adil Shah was a minor. She had traveled to Ahmadnagar to mourn her brother Burhan’s death but decided to stay and vigorously champion the cause of her nephew, Bahadur, who was still a minor. Meanwhile, the leaders of the rival faction, the Deccanis, invited the Mughals to intervene. The ensuing struggle was, in essence, a contest between Bijapur and the Mughals for dominance over Ahmadnagar.

        The Mughal invasion was led by Prince Murad, the governor of Gujarat, and Abdur Rahim Khan-i-Khanan. The ruler of Khandesh was asked to cooperate. Due to internal conflicts among the Ahmadnagar nobles, the Mughals faced little resistance until they reached the capital, Ahmadnagar. Chand Bibi took refuge in the fort along with the young king, Bahadur. After a prolonged siege of four months, during which Chand Bibi played a valiant role, the two sides reached an agreement. Ahmadnagar agreed to cede Berar to the Mughals in return for the recognition of Bahadur’s claim to the throne. Mughal suzerainty was also acknowledged. This settlement was reached in 1596.

        The Mughal annexation of Berar alarmed the Deccani states. They feared, not without reason, that Berar would provide the Mughals with a permanent foothold in the Deccan, which could be expanded at any time. Consequently, they sided with Ahmadnagar and obstructed the Mughals from taking full control of Berar. Soon, a combined force from Bijapur, Golconda, and Ahmadnagar, led by a Bijapuri commander, launched an invasion of Berar. In a fierce battle in 1597, the Mughals defeated the Deccani forces, which were three times their number. The armies of Bijapur and Golconda withdrew, leaving Chand Bibi to face the situation alone.

        Although Chand Bibi was inclined to honor the treaty of 1596, she could not prevent her nobles from harassing the Mughals in Berar. This led to a second Mughal siege of Ahmadnagar. With no assistance from any quarter, Chand Bibi opened negotiations with the Mughals. However, she was accused of treachery by a hostile faction and murdered. Thus ended the life of one of the most remarkable figures in Deccani politics.

        The Mughals then stormed and captured Ahmadnagar. The young king, Bahadur, was sent to the fortress of Gwalior. Balaghat was also annexed to the empire, and a Mughal garrison was stationed at Ahmadnagar. This occurred in 1600.

        However, the fall of Ahmadnagar’s fort and city, and the capture of Bahadur Nizam Shah, did not resolve Akbar’s problems in the Deccan. There was no longer a Nizam Shahi prince or noble with sufficient influence to negotiate with. At the same time, the Mughals were reluctant to advance beyond Ahmadnagar or attempt to seize all remaining territories of the state. The situation was further complicated by continuous disputes among the Mughal commanders.

        To assess the situation firsthand, Akbar advanced into Malwa and then into Khandesh. There, he learned that the new ruler of Khandesh had not shown due respect to Prince Daniyal when he passed through his territory on his way to Ahmadnagar. Akbar was also eager to secure the fort of Asirgarh in Khandesh, reputed to be the strongest fort in the Deccan. After a prolonged siege, during which a pestilence broke out in the fort, the ruler finally surrendered in 1601. Khandesh was incorporated into the Mughal Empire.

        Meanwhile, Prince Daniyal, Akbar’s youngest son, who had been placed in command of the Mughal forces in the Deccan, concluded a peace agreement with Murtaza Nizam Shah II. After the fall of Ahmadnagar, Murtaza had been proclaimed ruler by a group of Nizam Shahi nobles. According to the agreement, Ahmadnagar, Balaghat, and parts of Telangana were surrendered to the Mughals, while the remaining portion of the kingdom was confirmed to Murtaza Nizam Shah on the condition of loyalty and a promise never to rebel. This agreement was reached in 1601.

        After capturing Asirgarh, Akbar returned to the north to deal with the rebellion of his son, Salim.

        Although the conquest of Khandesh, Berar, and Balaghat, along with Mughal control over the fort of Ahmadnagar, were significant achievements, the Mughals had yet to consolidate their position in the Deccan. Akbar was aware that a lasting solution to the Deccan problem could not be achieved without an agreement with Bijapur. He, therefore, sent messages of assurance to Ibrahim Adil Shah II, who offered his daughter in marriage to Prince Daniyal. However, soon after the marriage in 1602, Prince Daniyal died due to excessive drinking.

        Thus, the situation in the Deccan remained unresolved and had to be addressed anew by Akbar’s successor, Jahangir.

    Rise of Malik Ambar and Frustration of Mughal Attempt at Consolidation
        After the fall of Ahmadnagar and the capture of Bahadur Nizam Shah by the Mughals, the state of Ahmadnagar would have disintegrated, and different parts of it would have, in all probability, been swallowed up by the neighboring states—if not for the rise of a remarkable man, Malik Ambar.

        Malik Ambar was an Abyssinian, born in Ethiopia. We do not know much about his early life and career. It seems that his poor parents sold him at the slave market of Baghdad. In the course of time, he was purchased by a merchant who treated him well and brought him to the Deccan, which was a land of promise. Malik Ambar rose in the service of Changez Khan, a famous and influential Habshi noble of Murtaza Nizam Shah. When the Mughals invaded Ahmadnagar, Ambar at first went to Bijapur to try his luck there. But he soon came back and enrolled himself in the powerful Habshi (Abyssinian) party, which was opposed to Chand Bibi.

        After the fall of Ahmadnagar, Malik Ambar found a Nizam Shahi prince and, with the tacit support of the ruler of Bijapur, set him up as Murtaza Nizam Shah II, with himself as the Peshwa—a title that had been common in Ahmadnagar much earlier. Malik Ambar gathered around him a large band of Maratha troopers or bargis. The Marathas were adept at rapid movements, plundering, and cutting off the supplies of enemy troops. Although this guerrilla mode of warfare was traditional with the Marathas in the Deccan, the Mughals were not used to it. With the help of the Marathas, Ambar made it difficult for the Mughals to consolidate their position in Berar, Ahmadnagar, and Balaghat.

        The Mughal commander in the Deccan at the time was Abdur Rahim Khan-i-Khanan, a shrewd and wily politician as well as an able soldier. He inflicted a crushing defeat on Ambar in 1601 in Telangana at a place called Nander. However, he decided to make friends with Ambar, considering it desirable that there should be some stability in the remaining Nizam Shahi kingdom. In turn, Ambar also found it useful to cultivate the friendship of Khan-i-Khanan, as it enabled him to deal with his internal rivals.

        However, after the death of Akbar, when the position of the Mughals in the Deccan became weak due to differences among the Mughal commanders, Ambar unleashed a fierce campaign to expel the Mughals from Berar, Balaghat, and Ahmadnagar. In this enterprise, he was helped by Ibrahim Adil Shah, the ruler of Bijapur, who considered it necessary that the Nizam Shahi state should continue as a buffer between Bijapur and the Mughals. He gave Ambar the powerful fort of Qandahar in Telangana for the residence of his family and for storing treasures, provisions, etc. He also lent him 10,000 horsemen, for whose support a definite tract of territory was set apart.

        The treaty was cemented by a marriage alliance between the daughter of one of the leading Ethiopian nobles of Bijapur and Malik Ambar’s son. The marriage was celebrated in 1609 with great rejoicing. Adil Shah gave a handsome dowry to the bride and spent about Rs. 80,000 on fireworks alone.

        Fortified with the support of Bijapur and with the active aid of the Marathas, Ambar soon forced Khan-i-Khanan to retreat to Burhanpur. Thus, by 1619, all the gains made by Akbar in the Deccan were lost. Although Jahangir sent Prince Parvez to the Deccan with a large army, he could not meet the challenge posed by Malik Ambar. Even Ahmadnagar was lost, and Parvez had to conclude a disgraceful peace with Ambar.

        The affairs of Malik Ambar continued to prosper, and the Mughals were not able to reassert themselves as long as he had the solid support of the Marathas and other elements in the Deccan. However, in time, Malik Ambar became arrogant and alienated his allies. The Khan-i-Khanan, who had again been posted as the Mughal viceroy of the Deccan, took advantage of the situation and won over several Habshi and Maratha nobles, such as Jagdev Rai, Babaji Kate, and Udaji Ram.

        Jahangir himself was well aware of the value of the Marathas, for he observed in his memoirs that the Marathas “are a hardy lot and are the center of resistance in that country.” With the help of the Maratha sardars, Khan-i-Khanan inflicted a crushing defeat on the combined forces of Ahmadnagar, Bijapur, and Golconda in 1616. The Mughals occupied the new Nizam Shahi capital, Khirki, and burned all its buildings before they left. This defeat shook the Deccani alliance against the Mughals. However, Ambar continued his resistance.

        To carry forward Khan-i-Khanan’s victory, Jahangir sent a grand army under his son, Prince Khurram (later Shah Jahan), and himself moved to Mandu to support the prince (1618). Faced with this threat, Ambar had no option but to submit. However, it is significant that in the treaty, Jahangir did not try to enlarge the conquests made by Akbar in the Deccan. This was not due to any military weakness on the part of Jahangir, as has sometimes been imagined, but due to deliberate policy. Apparently, Jahangir did not want to extend Mughal commitments in the Deccan or become too deeply embroiled in its affairs. Moreover, he was still hopeful that his moderation would enable the Deccani states to settle down and live in peace with the Mughals. As part of this policy, Jahangir tried to win over Bijapur to his side and sent a gracious farman to Adil Shah, calling him “son.”

        Despite these reverses, Ambar continued to lead the Deccani struggle against the Mughals, and there was no peace in the Deccan. However, two years later, the combined Deccani forces again suffered a severe defeat at the hands of the Mughals. Ambar had to restore all the Mughal territories and another 14 kos of adjoining territory. The Deccani states had to pay an indemnity of Rs. 5,00,000. The credit for these victories was given to Prince Khurram.

        The united front of the Deccani states against the Mughals soon crumbled. Old rivalries among the Deccani states resurfaced. Ambar conducted a series of campaigns against Bijapur for the recovery of Sholapur, which was a bone of contention between the two states. Through a rapid movement, Ambar reached the Bijapur capital, burnt the new capital of Nauraspur built by Ibrahim Adil Shah, and forced him to seek shelter in a fort. This might be regarded as the climax of Ambar’s power.

        Although Ambar showed remarkable military skill, energy, and determination, his achievements were short-lived due to his inability or unwillingness to come to terms with the Mughals. The chief significance of the rise of Ambar, however, was that it represented a clear recognition of the importance of the Marathas in Deccani affairs. The success of the Marathas under the leadership of Malik Ambar gave them confidence, enabling them to play an independent role later on.

        Malik Ambar tried to improve the administration of the Nizam Shahi state by introducing Todar Mal’s system of land revenue. He abolished the old system of giving land on contract (ijara), which was ruinous for the peasants, and adopted the zabti system.

        After 1622, when the Deccan was in turmoil due to the rebellion of Prince Khurram against Jahangir, Malik Ambar was able to recover many of the old territories that had been ceded to the Mughals. Jahangir’s attempt to consolidate the Mughal position in the Deccan was thus frustrated. However, the long-term benefits of reopening the dispute with the Mughals were doubtful. It led to a situation where Shah Jahan decided that he had no alternative but to extinguish Ahmadnagar as an independent state. Malik Ambar breathed his last in 1626 at the ripe age of 80. But the bitter fruits of his legacy had to be reaped by his successors.

    EXTINCTION OF AHMADNAGAR AND ACCEPTANCE OF MUGHAL SUZERAINTY BY BIJAPUR AND GOLCONDA
        Shah Jahan ascended the throne in 1628. Having commanded two expeditions to the Deccan as a prince and spent a considerable period in the Deccan during his rebellion against his father, Shah Jahan had extensive experience and personal knowledge of the Deccan and its politics.

        Shah Jahan’s first concern as a ruler was to recover the territories in the Deccan that had been lost to the Nizam Shahi ruler. For this purpose, he deputed an old and experienced noble, Khan-i-Jahan Lodi. However, Khan-i-Jahan Lodi failed in his mission and was recalled to the court. Shortly afterward, he rebelled and joined the Nizam Shah, who deputed him to expel the Mughals from the remaining portions of Berar and Balaghat. Granting asylum to a leading Mughal noble in this manner was a challenge that Shah Jahan could not ignore. It was clear that even after Malik Ambar’s death, his policy of refusing to recognize the Mughal position in Berar and Balaghat was being continued by the Nizam Shahi ruler.

        Shah Jahan, therefore, concluded that there could be no peace for the Mughals in the Deccan as long as Ahmadnagar remained an independent state. This was a major departure from the policy followed by Akbar and Jahangir. However, Shah Jahan was not keen on extending Mughal territories in the Deccan beyond what was absolutely necessary. He, therefore, wrote to the Bijapur ruler, offering to cede to him roughly one-third of the Ahmadnagar state if he cooperated with the Mughals in the projected campaign against Ahmadnagar. This was a shrewd move by Shah Jahan to isolate Ahmadnagar diplomatically and militarily. He also sent feelers to various Maratha sardars to join Mughal service.

        At first, Shah Jahan was successful in his overtures. Malik Ambar had defeated and killed some prominent Bijapuri nobles during his campaigns. The Adil Shah was also still smarting from the humiliation of the burning of Nauraspur and the annexation of Sholapur by Malik Ambar. He, therefore, accepted Shah Jahan’s proposal and posted an army at the Nizam Shahi border to cooperate with the Mughals.

        Around this time, Jadhav Rao, a prominent Maratha noble who had defected to the Mughals during Jahangir’s reign but later returned to the service of the Nizam Shah, was treacherously murdered on a charge of conspiring with the Mughals. As a result, Shahji Bhonsale, his son-in-law (and the father of Shivaji), defected to the Mughal side along with his relatives. Shah Jahan accorded him a mansab of 5000 and granted him jagirs in the Poona region. Several other prominent Maratha sardars also joined Shah Jahan.

        In 1629, Shah Jahan deputed large armies against Ahmadnagar—one to operate in the west in the Balaghat region and the other in the east in the Telangana region. The emperor himself moved to Burhanpur to coordinate their movements. Under relentless pressure, large parts of the Ahmadnagar state were brought under Mughal occupation. Parenda, one of the last outposts of the kingdom, was besieged. The Nizam Shah now sent a pitiful appeal to the Adil Shah, stating that most of the kingdom was under Mughal occupation and that if Parenda fell, it would mean the end of the Nizam Shahi dynasty—after which, he warned, it would be Bijapur’s turn.

        A strong group in the Bijapur court had been uneasy about the steady Mughal advance in Ahmadnagar. In fact, the Bijapuri forces at the border had merely observed the situation without taking an active part in the Mughal operations. The Mughals, on their part, had refused to hand over to the Adil Shah the areas allotted to him under the agreement. As a result, the Adil Shah made a sudden reversal in policy and decided to help the Nizam Shah, who agreed to return Sholapur to him. This shift in the political situation forced the Mughals to raise the siege of Parenda and retreat.

        However, the internal situation in Ahmadnagar soon turned in favor of the Mughals. Fath Khan, the son of Malik Ambar, had recently been appointed Peshwa by the Nizam Shah in the hope that he could induce Shah Jahan to make peace. Instead, Fath Khan opened secret negotiations with Shah Jahan and, at his instance, murdered the Nizam Shah and placed a puppet ruler on the throne. He also read the khutba and struck the sikka in the name of the Mughal emperor. As a reward, Fath Khan was taken into Mughal service, and the jagir around Poona, which had previously been allotted to Shahji, was transferred to him. As a result, Shahji defected from the Mughal side. These events took place in 1632.

        After Fath Khan’s surrender, Shah Jahan appointed Mahabat Khan as Mughal viceroy of the Deccan and returned to Agra. Mahabat Khan, faced with the combined opposition of Bijapur and the local Nizam Shahi nobles, including Shahji, found himself in a very difficult situation. Parenda surrendered to Bijapur. The Adil Shah made a strong bid for the fort of Daulatabad, offering a large sum of money to Fath Khan for surrendering the fort. Elsewhere as well, the Mughals struggled to hold their positions.

        It thus became clear that the Mughals and Bijapur were engaged in a contest to divide the prostrate body of Ahmadnagar between them. The Adil Shah sent a large army under Randaula Khan and Murari Pandit for the surrender of Daulatabad and for provisioning its garrison. Shahji also joined Bijapur’s service to harass the Mughals and cut off their supplies. However, their combined efforts were unsuccessful. Mahabat Khan closely besieged Daulatabad and forced the garrison to surrender in 1633. The Nizam Shah was imprisoned in Gwalior, marking the end of the Nizam Shahi dynasty.

        However, even this did not resolve the problems facing the Mughals. Following Malik Ambar’s example, Shahji found a Nizam Shahi prince and raised him as a ruler. The Adil Shah sent a force of 7,000–8,000 horsemen to aid Shahji and persuaded many Nizam Shahi nobles to surrender their forts to him. Many disbanded Nizam Shahi soldiers joined Shahji, whose force swelled to 20,000 horses. With these, he harassed the Mughals and took control of large portions of the Ahmadnagar state.

        Shah Jahan now decided to give personal attention to the problems of the Deccan. He realized that the crux of the issue was Bijapur’s attitude. He, therefore, deputed a large army to invade Bijapur and also sent feelers to the Adil Shah, offering to revive the earlier accord of dividing Ahmadnagar’s territory between Bijapur and the Mughals.

        The policy of using both force and diplomacy, combined with Shah Jahan’s advance to the Deccan, brought about another change in Bijapur’s politics. The leaders of the anti-Mughal faction, including Murari Pandit, were removed and killed. A new treaty (ahdnama) was signed with Shah Jahan. Under this treaty, the Adil Shah agreed to recognize Mughal suzerainty, pay an indemnity of twenty lakh rupees, and refrain from interfering in Golconda’s affairs, which was brought under Mughal protection. Any future disputes between Bijapur and Golconda were to be arbitrated by the Mughal emperor.

        Shah Jahan completed the Deccan settlement by entering into a treaty with Golconda as well. The Qutb Shah agreed to include Shah Jahan’s name in the khutba and to exclude the Iranian emperor’s name. The annual tribute of four lakh huns previously paid to Bijapur was remitted. Instead, Golconda was required to pay two lakh huns annually to the Mughal emperor in return for his protection.

        The treaties of 1636 with Bijapur and Golconda were statesmanlike. In effect, they enabled Shah Jahan to achieve Akbar’s ultimate objectives. Mughal suzerainty was now accepted across the region, allowing the Deccani states to expand southward.

    In the decade following the treaties of 1636, Bijapur and Golconda overran the rich and fertile Karnataka area, from the river Krishna to Tanjore and beyond. This area was ruled by a number of petty principalities. Many of them, such as the Nayaks of Tanjore, Jinji, and Madurai, owed nominal allegiance to the Rayal, the former ruler of Vijayanagar. A series of campaigns were conducted by Bijapur and Golconda against these states. With the help of Shah Jahan, they agreed to divide the territories and the spoils gained by their armies in the proportion of two-thirds to Bijapur and one-third to Golconda.

    Despite frequent quarrels between the two, the task of conquest progressed. Thus, in a short span of time, the territories of these two states more than doubled, and they reached the climax of their power and prosperity. If the rulers had been able to consolidate their hold over the areas they had conquered, the Deccan would have seen a long era of peace. However, rapid expansion weakened whatever internal cohesion these states had.

    Ambitious nobles such as Shahji and his son Shivaji in Bijapur, and Mir Jumla, the leading noble in Golconda, started carving out spheres of influence for themselves. The Mughals, too, found that the balance of power in the Deccan had been upset and demanded a price for their benevolent neutrality during the expansionist phase of these states.

    These developments came to a head in 1656 following the death of Muhammad Adil Shah and the arrival of Aurangzeb as the Mughal viceroy of the Deccan. These events will be dealt with in a subsequent chapter.

    CULTURAL CONTRIBUTION OF THE DECCAN STATES
        The Deccani states made significant cultural contributions. Ali Adil Shah (d. 1580) loved to hold discussions with Hindu and Muslim saints and was called a Sufi. He invited Catholic missionaries to his court even before Akbar had done so. He had an excellent library and appointed the well-known Sanskrit scholar, Waman Pandit, as its curator. The patronage of Sanskrit and Marathi was continued by his successors.

        The successor of Ali Adil Shah, Ibrahim Adil Shah II (1580–1627), ascended the throne at the age of nine. He was deeply concerned for the poor and earned the title ‘Aba Baba’ or ‘Friend of the Poor.’ He had a keen interest in music and composed a book called Kitab-i-Nauras, in which songs were set to various musical modes or ragas.

        He built a new capital, Nauraspur, where he invited a large number of musicians to settle. In his songs, he frequently invoked the goddess of music and learning, Saraswati. Due to his broad approach, he was called ‘Jagat Guru’ (World Teacher). He extended patronage to all, including Hindu saints and temples. This included grants to Pandharpur, the center of the worship of Vithoba, which became an important hub of the Bhakti movement in Maharashtra. The broad and tolerant policies of Ibrahim Adil Shah II were continued by his successors.

        The important role played by Maratha families in the service of the Ahmadnagar state has already been mentioned. The Qutb Shahs also employed both Hindus and Muslims in military, administrative, and diplomatic roles. Under Ibrahim Qutb Shah (d. 1580), Murari Rao rose to the position of Peshwa, second only to Mir Jumla, the wazir (prime minister). The Nayakwaris, who formed a military-cum-landed elite, remained powerful in the kingdom ever since the dynasty’s foundation. From 1672 until Golconda’s absorption into the Mughal Empire in 1687, the state’s administrative and military affairs were dominated by the brothers Madanna and Akkanna.

        Golconda became a major intellectual center, attracting many literary figures. Sultan Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah, a contemporary of Akbar, was an avid patron of literature and architecture. He was not only a great patron of art and literature but also a poet of high caliber. He wrote in Dakhini Urdu, Persian, and Telugu and left behind an extensive diwan (collection of poetry). He was the first to introduce a secular note in poetry. Apart from praising God and the Prophet, he wrote about nature, love, and the social life of his time.

        The growth of Urdu in its Dakhini form was a significant development of this period. The successors of Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah and many other poets and writers adopted Urdu as a literary language. In addition to Persian, these writers borrowed elements from Hindi and Telugu, incorporating forms, idioms, themes, and vocabulary. Urdu was also patronized at the Bijapur court, where the poet laureate Nusrati, who flourished in the mid-seventeenth century, wrote a romantic tale about Prince Manohar of Kanak Nagar and Madhu Malati. From the Deccan, Urdu spread to North India in the eighteenth century.

    Architecture and Art
        In the field of architecture, Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah constructed many buildings, the most famous being the Char Minar. Completed in 1591–92, it stood at the center of the newly founded city of Hyderabad. The structure features four lofty arches facing different directions, with four four-story minarets rising to a height of 48 meters. Its double-screened arches have intricate carvings.

        The rulers of Bijapur maintained a high standard and impeccable taste in architecture. The most famous Bijapuri buildings of this period are:
            •	Ibrahim Rauza – A mausoleum built for Ibrahim Adil Shah, showcasing Deccani architecture at its finest.
            •	Gol Gumbaz – Built in 1660, it features the largest single dome ever constructed. The structure is well-balanced, with a massive dome complemented by tall, tapering minarets at the corners. It is said that a whisper on one side of the huge main hall can be heard clearly at the other end.

        Painting also flourished in the Deccan, reaching its peak during the reign of Ibrahim Adil Shah II (1580–1627).

        Thus, the Deccani states overcame the sectarian violence of the sixteenth century and maintained high standards of communal harmony. They made notable contributions in the fields of music, literature, architecture, and painting.


- India in the First Half of the Seventeenth Century

    Political and Administrative Developments in India
        The first half of the seventeenth century in India was, on the whole, an era of progress and growth. During this period, the Mughal Empire was ruled by two capable rulers—Jahangir (1605–1627) and Shah Jahan (1628–1658). In southern India, too, as we have seen, the states of Bijapur and Golconda provided stability, peace, and cultural growth. The Mughal rulers consolidated the administrative system that had developed under Akbar. They maintained alliances with the Rajputs and sought to further broaden the political base of the empire by forming ties with powerful groups such as the Afghans and the Marathas. They adorned their capitals with beautiful buildings, many constructed in marble, and sought to make the Mughal court a center of cultural life in the country.

        The Mughals played a crucial role in stabilizing India’s relations with neighboring Asian powers such as Iran, the Uzbeks, and the Ottoman Turks, thereby opening up greater avenues for India’s foreign trade. Trade concessions granted to various European trading companies were also aimed at promoting foreign trade. However, several negative aspects emerged during this period. The growing prosperity of the ruling class did not filter down to peasants and workers, whose lives remained hard and miserable. The Mughal ruling elite remained largely oblivious to the advancements in science and technology occurring in the West. The problem of succession to the throne created instability, posing a threat to both the political system and economic and cultural growth.

        Jahangir, the eldest son of Akbar, succeeded to the throne without difficulty, as his younger brothers had died during Akbar’s lifetime due to excessive drinking. However, shortly after Jahangir’s accession, his eldest son, Khusrau, rebelled against him. A struggle between father and son for the throne was not unusual in those times—Jahangir himself had rebelled against Akbar, disturbing the empire for some time. Khusrau’s rebellion, however, was short-lived. Jahangir defeated him in a battle near Lahore, and he was soon captured and imprisoned.

        We have already seen how Jahangir brought an end to the conflict with Mewar, which had lasted for four decades, and the struggle in the Deccan against Malik Ambar, who refused to accept the settlement made by Akbar. In the east, conflict persisted. Although Akbar had weakened the Afghan power in Bengal, Afghan chiefs still controlled various regions. They had the support of several Hindu rulers, such as the rajas of Jessore, Kamrup (western Assam), and Cachar. Towards the end of his reign, Akbar had recalled Raja Man Singh, the governor of Bengal, to the court. During his absence, the Afghan chief Usman Khan and others took the opportunity to rebel. Jahangir initially sent Man Singh back to Bengal, but the situation continued to worsen.

        In 1608, Jahangir appointed Islam Khan, the grandson of the Sufi saint Shaikh Salim Chishti, as the governor of Bengal. Though young, Islam Khan handled the situation with great energy and foresight. He won over many local zamindars, including the Raja of Jessore, and established his headquarters at Dacca, which was strategically located for dealing with the rebels. To maintain control over the region, the provincial capital was soon transferred from Rajmahal to Dacca, which began to develop rapidly. Islam Khan first targeted Sonargaon, which was under the control of Musa Khan and his confederates, known as the Barah Bhuiyan (Twelve Zamindars). After three years of campaigning, Sonargaon was captured, and Musa Khan surrendered. He was sent to the Mughal court as a prisoner. Next, Islam Khan turned his attention to Usman Khan, who was defeated in a fierce battle. With the fall of Usman Khan, the Afghan resistance was crushed, and the remaining rebels soon surrendered. The principalities of Jessore and Kamrup were annexed, firmly establishing Mughal control over eastern Bengal.

        Like Akbar, Jahangir understood that lasting conquests could not be sustained by force alone but required the goodwill of the people. He treated the defeated Afghan chiefs and their followers with consideration and sympathy. Many detained princes and zamindars of Bengal were released and allowed to return to their territories. Even Musa Khan was eventually freed, and his estates were restored. As a result, after a long period of conflict, peace and prosperity returned to Bengal. More Afghans were also inducted into the Mughal nobility, further integrating them into the empire. The leading Afghan noble under Jahangir was Khan-i-Jahan Lodi, who rendered distinguished service in the Deccan.

        By 1622, Jahangir had subdued Malik Ambar, ended the prolonged conflict with Mewar, and pacified Bengal. At the age of 51, he seemed poised to enjoy a long period of peace and stability. However, two critical developments changed the course of events: the Persian conquest of Qandhar, which was a major blow to Mughal prestige, and Jahangir’s failing health, which triggered a succession struggle among his sons and led to intense power struggles among the nobles. These developments thrust Nur Jahan, Jahangir’s influential wife, into the political arena, where she played a key role in court politics during the final years of his reign.

    Nur Jahan
        The story of Nur Jahan’s life, her first marriage with an Iranian, Sher Afgan, and his death in a clash with the Mughal governor of Bengal, as well as her stay in Agra with an elderly relation of Jahangir and her marriage to Jahangir four years later (1611), are well known. Sober historians do not believe that Jahangir was responsible for the death of her first husband. Jahangir’s chance meeting with her in the Meena Bazar and subsequent marriage was not unusual. Her family was respectable, and her father, Itimad-ud-Daula, had been made joint diwan by Jahangir in the first year of his reign. After a brief eclipse due to the involvement of one of his sons in Khusrau’s rebellion, he was restored to his position. Having proved his capability in this office, and following Nur Jahan’s marriage to Jahangir, he was elevated to the post of chief diwan. Other members of the family also benefited from this alliance, with their mansabs being increased. Itimad-ud-Daula proved to be competent and loyal, wielding considerable influence in state affairs until his death ten years later. Nur Jahan’s brother, Asaf Khan, was also a learned and able man. He was appointed as khan-i-saman, a post reserved for nobles in whom the emperor had full confidence. He married his daughter to Khurram (Shah Jahan), who became his father’s favorite following Khusrau’s rebellion and imprisonment.

        Some modern historians believe that Nur Jahan, along with her father and brother, and in alliance with Khurram, formed a group or “junta” that managed Jahangir, making it impossible for anyone to advance in their career without their support. This allegedly led to a division of the court into two factions—the Nur Jahan junta and its opponents. It is further argued that Nur Jahan’s political ambitions ultimately led to a rift between her and Shah Jahan, driving him to rebel against his father in 1622, as he believed that Jahangir was entirely under Nur Jahan’s influence. However, other historians dispute this view. They argue that until 1622, when Jahangir’s health declined, all significant political decisions were taken by Jahangir himself, as evidenced by his autobiography. The precise political role of Nur Jahan during this period remains unclear. Coins were issued in her name, and she was given the title of Badshah Begum. Important nobles used to call on her to apprise her of events and seek her intervention with the emperor. She dominated the royal household and introduced new fashions inspired by Persian traditions. Due to her influence, Persian art and culture gained great prestige at court. Nur Jahan was Jahangir’s constant companion, even accompanying him on hunting expeditions, as she was an excellent rider and a skilled shot. Given her position, many people sought her intervention with the emperor. Under Mughal rule, no woman had previously attained such an important position. However, Jahangir was not entirely dependent on the junta or on Nur Jahan, as evidenced by the continued promotions of nobles outside the junta’s influence. The rise of Shah Jahan was due to his personal qualities and achievements rather than Nur Jahan’s backing. Shah Jahan had his own ambitions, of which Jahangir was well aware. In any case, no ruler could afford to allow a noble or a prince to become too powerful, as this would challenge his authority. This was the fundamental reason for the conflict between Jahangir and Shah Jahan.

    Shah Jahan’s Rebellion
        The immediate cause of the rebellion was Shah Jahan’s refusal to proceed to Qandhar, which had been besieged by the Persians. Shah Jahan feared that the campaign would be long and arduous and that intrigues would be plotted against him in his absence from court. Hence, he made several demands, including full command of the army, which comprised veterans from the Deccan, complete control over Punjab, and authority over several important forts. Jahangir was enraged by this defiant stance. Convinced that the prince was contemplating rebellion, he wrote harsh letters and took punitive measures, further aggravating the situation and leading to an open breach. From Mandu, where he was stationed, Shah Jahan made a sudden dash toward Agra in an attempt to capture the treasures stored there. Shah Jahan had the full support of the Deccan army and all the nobles stationed there. Gujarat and Malwa had declared their loyalty to him, and he had the backing of his father-in-law, Asaf Khan, along with several important nobles at court. However, in a battle near Delhi, Shah Jahan was defeated by forces led by Mahabat Khan. He was saved from total defeat by the valorous stand of the Mewar contingent. Another army was dispatched to wrest Gujarat from his control, and Shah Jahan was eventually forced out of Mughal territories. He sought refuge with his former enemies, the Deccan rulers, but later crossed into Orissa, took the governor by surprise, and soon brought Bengal and Bihar under his control.

        Mahabat Khan was again sent to subdue Shah Jahan. He took decisive measures, forcing Shah Jahan to retreat to the Deccan. This time, Shah Jahan allied with Malik Ambar, who was once again at war with the Mughals. However, soon afterward, Shah Jahan wrote letters of apology to Jahangir. Jahangir, recognizing the need for reconciliation, decided to pardon his ablest and most energetic son. As part of the settlement, two of Shah Jahan’s sons, Dara and Aurangzeb, were sent to the Mughal court as hostages, and a tract in the Deccan was assigned to Shah Jahan for his expenses. This agreement was finalized in 1626.

    The Aftermath of Shah Jahan’s Rebellion
        Shah Jahan’s rebellion distracted the empire for four years, resulting in the loss of Qandhar and encouraging the Deccanis to recover territories previously surrendered to the Mughals during Akbar’s reign. The rebellion also exposed a fundamental flaw in the Mughal system—a successful prince often became a rival power center, especially when it was believed that the reigning monarch was unable or unwilling to exercise supreme authority. Shah Jahan repeatedly claimed that with Jahangir’s failing health, all effective power had slipped into the hands of Nur Jahan Begum, though this claim is debatable since Asaf Khan, his father-in-law, was the imperial diwan. Moreover, though physically weak, Jahangir remained mentally sharp, and no major decision was taken without his consent.

        Jahangir’s illness also heightened the risk of ambitious nobles attempting to seize power. This fear materialized when Mahabat Khan, who had played a significant role in quelling Shah Jahan’s rebellion, felt sidelined at court. Summoned to provide accounts, he arrived with a trusted group of Rajputs and seized the emperor at a crucial moment while the royal camp was crossing the river Jhelum on its way to Kabul. Nur Jahan, who had not been captured, managed to escape across the river but failed in her initial attempts to rescue Jahangir. Determined, she later surrendered herself to Mahabat Khan to remain close to her husband. Within six months, exploiting Mahabat Khan’s mistakes and the growing resentment of his Rajput soldiers, she successfully turned most nobles against him. Realizing his precarious position, Mahabat Khan abandoned Jahangir and fled from court. He later joined Shah Jahan in the Deccan, where the prince was waiting for another opportunity.

        Nur Jahan’s defeat of Mahabat Khan was one of her greatest victories, achieved through her resilience and political acumen. However, her triumph was short-lived, as within a year, Jahangir passed away near Lahore in 1627. The shrewd Asaf Khan, who had been carefully preparing for Shah Jahan’s succession, swiftly took control. Supported by the diwan, the chief nobles, and the army, he placed Nur Jahan under virtual house arrest and summoned Shah Jahan. Upon reaching Agra, Shah Jahan was enthroned with great celebration. To secure his position, he ordered the execution of his imprisoned brother, cousins, and other rivals. This precedent, along with earlier instances of sons rebelling against their fathers, set a dangerous trend for the Mughal dynasty. Shah Jahan himself would later suffer the consequences of the very actions he had initiated.

        After Shah Jahan’s accession, Nur Jahan was granted a settlement and lived in retirement until her death eighteen years later. She was buried in Lahore. Shah Jahan’s reign (1628–1658) was marked by extensive administrative, military, and cultural activities. Having examined his Deccan policy, we now turn to the foreign policy of the Mughals, which reached its zenith under his rule.

    FOREIGN POLICY OF THE MUGHALS
        We have seen how, following the breakup of the Timurid Empire in the second half of the fifteenth century, three powerful empires—the Uzbek, the Safavid, and the Ottoman—established themselves in Transoxiana (Central Asia), Iran, and Turkey. The Uzbeks were the natural enemies of the Mughals, having been responsible for the expulsion of Babur and other Timurid princes from Samarkand and the adjoining area, including Khurasan. At the same time, the Uzbeks clashed with the rising power of the Safavids, who claimed Khurasan. The Khurasanian plateau linked Iran with Central Asia, and the trade routes to China and India passed across it. It was natural for the Safavids and the Mughals to ally against the Uzbek threat, especially as there were no significant frontier disputes between them, except for Qandhar. The Uzbeks attempted to exploit sectarian differences with the Safavid rulers of Iran, who had ruthlessly persecuted the Sunnis. Both the Uzbek and the Mughal rulers were Sunnis. However, the Mughals were too broadminded to be swayed by sectarian differences. Annoyed by the Mughal alliance with a Shia power, namely Iran, the Uzbeks occasionally incited the fanatic Afghan and Baluchi tribesmen living in the northwest frontier tracts between Peshawar and Kabul against the Mughals.

        The most powerful empire in West Asia at the time was that of the Ottoman Turks. The Ottoman, or Usmanli, Turks—so named after their first ruler, Usman (d. 1326)—had overrun Asia Minor and Eastern Europe and had also conquered Syria, Egypt, and Arabia by 1529. They had received the title “Sultan of Rum” from the shadowy caliph residing in Cairo. Later, they also assumed the title of Padshah-i-Islam.

        The rise of a Shiite power in Iran made the Ottoman Sultans conscious of the danger to their eastern flank, fearing that the expansion of the Safavids would encourage Shiism in their own territories. In 1514, the Turkish Sultan defeated the Shah of Iran in a famous battle. The Ottomans clashed with Iran over the control of Baghdad and also for the northern Iranian territories around Erivan. They gradually extended their influence over the coastal regions around Arabia and attempted to oust the Portuguese from the Persian Gulf and the Indian Ocean.

        The Ottoman threat from the west made the Persians eager to befriend the Mughals, particularly when they faced an aggressive Uzbek power in the east. The Mughals refused the Uzbek proposals for a tripartite Ottoman-Mughal-Uzbek alliance against the Persians, as it would have upset the Asian balance of power and left them vulnerable to the might of the Uzbeks. An alliance with Iran was also beneficial in promoting trade with Central Asia. Had the Mughals possessed a stronger navy, they might have sought a closer alliance with Turkey, which was also a naval power engaged in struggles against the European navies in the Mediterranean. However, the Mughals were wary of a closer relationship with Turkey, as they were unwilling to acknowledge the superiority claimed by the Turkish Sultan as the successor to the caliph. These were some of the factors that shaped the foreign policy of the Mughals.

    Akbar and the Uzbeks
        In 1510, following the defeat of the Uzbek chief Shaibani Khan by the Safavids, Babur briefly regained control of Samarkand. However, Babur had to abandon the city after the Uzbeks inflicted a decisive defeat on the Persians. Nevertheless, the assistance extended to him by the Persian monarch established a tradition of friendship between the Mughals and the Safavids. Later, Humayun also received help from the Safavid monarch, Shah Tahmasp, when he sought refuge at his court after being ousted from India by Sher Shah.

        The territorial power of the Uzbeks grew rapidly in the 1570s under Abdullah Khan Uzbek. In 1572–73, Abdullah Khan seized Balkh, which, along with Badakhshan, had served as a buffer between the Mughals and the Uzbeks. In 1577, Abdullah Khan sent an embassy to Akbar, proposing to partition Iran. After the death of Shah Tahmasp in 1576, Iran was plunged into anarchy and disorder. Abdullah Khan urged Akbar to lead an expedition from India into Iran so that they could jointly liberate Iraq, Khurasan, and Fars from the “innovators” (Shias). However, Akbar was not swayed by this sectarian appeal. A strong Iran was essential to keep the restless Uzbeks in check. At the same time, Akbar had no desire to engage in conflict with the Uzbeks unless they directly threatened Kabul or his Indian possessions. This was the key to Akbar’s foreign policy. Abdullah Khan also approached the Ottoman Sultan, proposing a tripartite alliance of Sunni powers against Iran. In response, Akbar sent an embassy to Abdullah Khan, stating that differences in law and religion were not sufficient grounds for conquest. Regarding the difficulties faced by pilgrims traveling to Mecca, Akbar pointed out that with the conquest of Gujarat, a new route for Hajj pilgrims had been established. He also emphasized the long-standing friendship with Iran and rebuked Abdullah Khan for making derogatory remarks about the Safavids.

        Akbar’s growing interest in Central Asian affairs was evident in his decision to grant refuge at his court to the Timurid prince Mirza Sulaiman, who had been ousted from Badakhshan by his grandson. Abul Fazl records that the Khyber Pass was made suitable for wheeled traffic and that, due to fear of the Mughals, the gates of Balkh were usually kept closed. To forestall an invasion of Badakhshan, Abdullah Khan instigated unrest among the northwest frontier tribes through his agent, Jalal, a religious fanatic. The situation became so serious that Akbar had to personally move to Attock. It was during these operations that he lost one of his closest friends, Raja Birbal, in a battle in the Khyber Pass.

        In 1585, Abdullah Khan suddenly conquered Badakhshan. Both Mirza Sulaiman and his grandson sought refuge at Akbar’s court and were granted suitable mansabs (official ranks). Meanwhile, with the death of his half-brother Mirza Hakim in 1585, Akbar annexed Kabul to his dominions. Thus, the Mughal and Uzbek frontiers now directly bordered each other.

        Abdullah Khan sent another embassy, which Akbar received while stationed at Attock on the Indus River. Akbar’s continued presence near the frontier unsettled Abdullah Khan. Meanwhile, the Uzbeks succeeded in capturing most of the territories they had coveted in Khurasan from Iran.

        Under these circumstances, Akbar found it best to negotiate with the Uzbek chief. He dispatched an envoy to Abdullah Khan with a letter and a verbal message. It appears that an agreement was reached, defining the Hindukush as the boundary between the two empires. This implied that the Mughals relinquished their claims over Badakhshan and Balkh—territories ruled by Timurid princes until 1585. In return, the Uzbeks refrained from laying claim to Kabul and Qandhar. Though neither side formally abandoned its territorial claims, the agreement provided the Mughals with a defensible frontier along the Hindukush. Akbar completed this objective in 1595 by acquiring Qandhar.

        From 1586 onward, Akbar remained in Lahore to monitor the situation. He returned to Agra only after the death of Abdullah Khan Uzbek in 1598. Following Abdullah’s death, the Uzbek power fragmented into warring principalities and ceased to pose a significant threat to the Mughals for a considerable period.

    Relations with Iran and the Question of Qandhar
        The dread of Uzbek power was the most potent factor that brought the Safavids and the Mughals together, despite the Uzbek attempt to raise anti-Shia sentiments against Iran and the Mughal dislike of the intolerant policies adopted by the Safavid rulers. The only trouble spot between the two was Qandhar, the possession of which was claimed by both on strategic and economic grounds, as well as considerations of sentiment and prestige. Qandhar had been a part of the Timurid Empire and had been ruled by Babur’s cousins, the rulers of Herat, until they were ousted by the Uzbeks in 1507.

        Strategically, Qandhar was vital for the defense of Kabul. The fort of Qandhar was considered one of the strongest in the region and was well supplied with water. Situated at the junction of roads leading to Kabul and Herat, Qandhar dominated southern Afghanistan and occupied a position of immense strategic importance. A modern commentator has observed:

            “The Kabul-Ghazni-Qandhar line represented a strategic and logical frontier; beyond Kabul and Khyber, there was no natural line of defense. Moreover, the possession of Qandhar made it easier to control the Afghan and Baluch tribes.”

        After the conquest of Sindh and Baluchistan by Akbar, the strategic and economic importance of Qandhar for the Mughals increased. Qandhar was a rich and fertile province and was the hub of the movement of men and goods between India and Central Asia. The trade from Central Asia to Multan via Qandhar, and from there down the Indus River to the sea, steadily gained importance because the roads across Iran were frequently disturbed due to wars and internal commotions. Akbar sought to promote trade along this route and pointed out to Abdullah Uzbek that it was an alternative route for pilgrims and goods traffic to Mecca. Taking all these factors into account, it would appear that Qandhar was not as important to the Persians as it was to the Mughals. For Iran, Qandhar was more of an outpost—an important one, no doubt—rather than a vital bastion in a defense system.

        In the early phase, however, the dispute over Qandhar did not affect good relations between the two countries. Qandhar came under Babur’s control in 1522 when the Uzbeks were threatening Khurasan once again.

        Shah Tahmasp captured Qandhar, taking advantage of the confusion following Humayun’s death. Akbar made no effort to regain it until the Uzbeks under Abdullah Uzbek posed a renewed threat to both Iran and the Mughals. The Mughal conquest of Qandhar (1595) was not part of an agreement between Akbar and the Uzbeks to partition the Persian Empire, as some modern historians have argued. Instead, it was undertaken to establish a viable defensive line in the northwest against a possible Uzbek invasion, since Khurasan had by then fallen under Uzbek control and Qandhar was cut off from Persia.

        Relations between Iran and the Mughals continued to be cordial despite the Mughal conquest of Qandhar. Shah Abbas I (ruled 1588–1625), perhaps the greatest of the Safavid rulers, was keen to maintain good relations with the Mughals. There was a regular exchange of embassies and costly gifts, including rarities, between him and Jahangir. Shah Abbas also established close diplomatic and commercial relations with the Deccani states, but this was not objected to by Jahangir. Neither side felt threatened, and there exists an imaginary portrait by a court artist showing Jahangir and Shah Abbas embracing, with a globe of the world beneath their feet. Culturally, too, the two countries grew even closer during this period, with the active involvement of Nur Jahan. However, the alliance ultimately proved more beneficial to Shah Abbas than to Jahangir, as it led the latter to neglect cultivating friendships with the Uzbek chiefs, believing himself secure in the friendship of his “brother,” Shah Abbas.

        In 1620, Shah Abbas politely requested the restoration of Qandhar and prepared for an attack. Jahangir was caught off guard, as he was diplomatically isolated and militarily unprepared. Hasty preparations for the defense of Qandhar were made, but Prince Shah Jahan put forward impossible demands before agreeing to march. As a result, Qandhar passed into Persian hands in 1622. Although Shah Abbas attempted to erase the bitterness over this loss by sending a lavish embassy to Jahangir and offering facile explanations—which Jahangir formally accepted—the cordiality that had marked Mughal-Iranian relations came to an end.

        After the death of Shah Abbas (1629), disturbances broke out in Iran. Taking advantage of this, and after resolving his Deccan affairs, Shah Jahan persuaded Ali Mardan Khan, the Persian governor of Qandhar, to defect to the Mughal side in 1638.

    SHAH JAHAN’S BALKH CAMPAIGN
        The conquest of Qandhar was only a means to an end. Shah Jahan was more concerned with the serious danger of recurrent Uzbek attacks on Kabul and their intrigues with the Baluch and Afghan tribes. At the time, both Bokhara and Balkh had come under the control of Nazr Muhammad. Nazr Muhammad and his son, Abdul Aziz, were ambitious and had launched a series of attacks with the help of Afghan tribesmen to gain control of Kabul and Ghazni.

        However, soon afterward, Abdul Aziz led a rebellion against his father, and only Balkh remained under the control of Nazr Muhammad, who appealed to Shah Jahan for help. Secure from the Persian side, Shah Jahan accepted the appeal with alacrity. He moved from Lahore to Kabul and deputed a large army under Prince Murad to assist Nazr Muhammad. The army, consisting of 50,000 cavalry and 10,000 infantry—including musketeers, rocketeers, and gunners, along with a contingent of Rajputs—left Kabul in mid-1646.

        Shah Jahan had carefully instructed Prince Murad to treat Nazr Muhammad with great consideration and to restore Balkh to him if he behaved with modesty and submission. Furthermore, if Nazr Muhammad expressed a desire to regain Samarqand and Bokhara, the prince was to assist him in every possible way. Clearly, Shah Jahan wanted a friendly ruler in Bokhara who looked to the Mughals for support.

        However, Murad’s impetuosity ruined the plan. He marched on Balkh without waiting for instructions from Nazr Muhammad and ordered his men to enter the fort where Nazr Muhammad was residing. Uncertain of the prince’s intentions, Nazr Muhammad fled. The Mughals were forced to occupy Balkh and hold it against a sullen and hostile population. Moreover, there was no viable alternative to Nazr Muhammad’s rule. Abdul Aziz, Nazr Muhammad’s son, rallied the Uzbek tribes against the Mughals in Transoxiana and mustered an army of 120,000 men across the river Oxus.

        Meanwhile, Prince Murad, who was eager to return home, was replaced by Prince Aurangzeb. The Mughals made no effort to defend the Oxus, as it was easily fordable. Instead, they stationed pickets at strategic locations and kept the main force together to respond swiftly to any threat. Abdul Aziz crossed the Oxus, but in a running battle outside the gates of Balkh (1647), the Mughals routed the Uzbeks.

        The Mughal victory at Balkh paved the way for negotiations with the Uzbeks. Abdul Aziz’s supporters gradually dispersed, and he sought reconciliation with the Mughals. Meanwhile, Nazr Muhammad, who had taken refuge in Persia, also sought Mughal assistance to regain his throne. After careful consideration, Shah Jahan decided in favor of restoring Nazr Muhammad. However, he was first required to make an apology and humble submission to Prince Aurangzeb. This proved to be a mistake, as the proud Uzbek ruler was unwilling to demean himself, especially since he knew the Mughals could not hold Balkh indefinitely.

        After waiting in vain for Nazr Muhammad to appear personally, the Mughals evacuated Balkh in October 1647 as winter approached and supplies ran low. The retreat nearly turned into a rout, with hostile Uzbek bands harassing them. Though the Mughals suffered grievous losses, Aurangzeb’s leadership prevented a disaster.

        The Balkh campaign of Shah Jahan has been a subject of considerable debate among modern historians. From the foregoing account, it is clear that Shah Jahan was not attempting to fix the Mughal frontier along the so-called ‘scientific line’ of the Amu Darya (Oxus), as the river was hardly a defensible boundary. Nor was he motivated by the desire to conquer Samarqand and Farghana, the ancestral homelands of the Mughals, despite frequent references to them. Shah Jahan’s objective was to secure a friendly ruler in Balkh and Badakhshan—regions bordering Kabul that had been ruled by Timurid princes until 1585. He believed this would help contain the unrest among Afghan tribes around Ghazni and in the Khyber Pass.

        Militarily, the campaign was a success—the Mughals conquered Balkh and defeated Uzbek attempts to reclaim it. This marked the first significant victory of Indian arms in the region, and Shah Jahan had reason to celebrate. However, the Mughals lacked the resources to maintain long-term control over Balkh. Politically, sustaining Mughal influence in Balkh proved difficult due to persistent Persian hostility and an unfriendly local population.

        Ultimately, while the Balkh campaign temporarily bolstered the prestige of Mughal arms, it yielded little political advantage. Perhaps it would have been more beneficial for the Mughals, saving considerable expenditure in men and money, if Shah Jahan had firmly adhered to the Kabul-Ghazni-Qandhar line established by Akbar. Nevertheless, as the ruler of Balkh, Nazr Muhammad remained friendly toward the Mughals for the rest of his life, and diplomatic exchanges continued between the two courts.

        Thus, the Balkh expedition did succeed in preventing the rise of a united Uzbek state, which could have posed a serious threat to Mughal control over Kabul.

    Mughal-Persian Relations—The Last Phase
        The setback in Balkh led to a revival of Uzbek hostility in the Kabul region and Afghan tribal unrest in the Khyber-Ghazni area, emboldening the Persians to attack and conquer Qandhar in 1649. This was a significant blow to Shah Jahan’s pride, prompting him to launch three major campaigns, one after another, under royal princes to recover Qandhar. The first attack was led by Aurangzeb, the hero of Balkh, with an army of 50,000. Though the Mughals defeated the Persians outside the fort, they failed to capture it due to strong Persian resistance.

        A second attempt by Aurangzeb three years later also failed. The most ambitious effort was made the following year (1653) under Dara Shikoh, Shah Jahan’s favorite son. Despite his boastful claims, Dara was unable to force the fort into surrender, even with a large army. An attempt to breach the fort using two of the empire’s largest cannons also proved ineffective.

        The Mughal failure at Qandhar did not indicate weakness in their artillery, as some historians have suggested. Rather, it highlighted the inherent strength of Qandhar’s fortifications when defended by a determined commander and the limitations of medieval artillery against strong forts. This experience was similar to that of the Mughals in the Deccan. It may be argued that Shah Jahan’s attachment to Qandhar was more sentimental than strategic, as the weakening of both the Uzbeks and the Safavids had reduced Qandhar’s earlier significance. The loss of Qandhar itself was less damaging than the repeated Mughal failures, which hurt their prestige. However, this should not be overstated, as the Mughal Empire remained at its height during Aurangzeb’s reign. Even the proud Ottoman Sultan sent an embassy to Aurangzeb in 1680, seeking his support.

        Aurangzeb decided not to pursue the futile contest over Qandhar and quietly resumed diplomatic relations with Iran. However, in 1668, Shah Abbas II of Iran insulted the Mughal envoy, made disparaging remarks about Aurangzeb, and even threatened an invasion. This led to heightened Mughal military activity in Punjab and Kabul, but before any conflict could arise, Shah Abbas II died. His successors were weak rulers, and Persia ceased to pose a threat to India until Nadir Shah emerged more than fifty years later.

        On the whole, the Mughals succeeded in maintaining a scientific frontier in the northwest, based on the Hindukush, with Qandhar as its outer bastion. Their foreign policy primarily focused on India’s defense, with diplomacy reinforcing their military strategy. Friendship with Persia remained central despite temporary setbacks over Qandhar. The often-proclaimed ambition of reclaiming the Mughal homelands was more of a diplomatic ploy than a serious endeavor. The combination of military and diplomatic measures effectively shielded India from foreign invasions for a long period.

        Additionally, the Mughals insisted on relations of equality with the leading Asian powers of the time. They maintained parity with the Safavids, who claimed a privileged position due to their lineage from the Prophet, and with the Ottoman Sultans, who bore the title Padshah-i-Islam and positioned themselves as successors to the Caliphs of Baghdad. The Mughals also used their foreign policy to promote India’s commercial interests. Kabul and Qandhar served as the twin gateways for India’s trade with Central Asia.

    Growth of Administration: Mansabdari System and the Mughal Army
        The administrative machinery and revenue system established by Akbar continued under Jahangir and Shah Jahan with minor modifications. However, significant changes occurred in the functioning of the mansabdari system.

        Under Akbar, mansabdars were paid at an average rate of Rs. 240 per annum per sawar for maintaining their contingents. During Jahangir’s reign, this amount was reduced to Rs. 200 per annum. Additionally, mansabdars were permitted to retain 5% of their total salary bill to cover various contingent expenses. The Mughal military favored mixed contingents, incorporating soldiers from Irani and Turani Mughals, Indian Afghans, and Rajputs in fixed proportions to curb tribal or ethnic exclusivity. However, in special cases, certain Mughal or Rajput mansabdars were allowed to recruit exclusively from their own ethnic groups.

        Several modifications were made during this period. There was a general tendency to reduce salaries. Jahangir introduced the du-aspah sih-aspah system, allowing selected nobles to maintain a larger number of troopers without increasing their sawar rank. This system required a mansabdar with this distinction to maintain, and be paid for, double the number of troopers indicated by his sawar rank. For example, a mansabdar with a zat rank of 3000 and sawar rank of 3000 du-aspah sih-aspah would be required to maintain 6000 troopers. Normally, no mansabdar was given a sawar rank higher than his zat rank.

        During Shah Jahan’s reign, further changes were introduced to drastically reduce the number of sawars a noble was required to maintain. A noble was expected to maintain only one-third of his sawar rank, and in some cases, only one-fourth. For instance, a noble with a zat rank of 3000 and a sawar rank of 3000 would need to maintain just 1000 troopers. If his rank included the du-aspah sih-aspah distinction, he would maintain 2000 troopers.

        Although mansabdars were theoretically paid in rupees, their salaries were typically disbursed through jagirs. Most mansabdars preferred jagirs, as cash payments were often delayed and accompanied by bureaucratic harassment. Additionally, control over land was a symbol of social prestige. By implementing a structured system of ranks and regulations, the Mughals bureaucratized the nobility. However, they could not completely sever the nobility’s feudal attachment to land, which remained a significant challenge.

        To allocate jagirs, the revenue department maintained a register of assessed income (jama), recorded not in rupees but in dams (40 dams equaled one rupee). This document, known as jama-dami, provided income estimates for various regions. As the number of mansabdars increased and financial constraints grew, even these modifications were deemed insufficient. Drastic salary cuts would have provoked discontent among nobles, which the rulers could not afford. Consequently, a new scaling device was introduced to further reduce the quota of troopers and horses a noble had to maintain.

        The salaries of mansabdars were adjusted using a month-scale, reducing their obligations accordingly. Salaries were calculated for 10 months, 8 months, 6 months, or even less. For example, a mansabdar with a zat rank of 3000 and a sawar rank of 3000, who was required to maintain 1000 troopers under the earlier one-third rule, would now maintain only 1800 horses under a 10-month scale and just 1000 horses under a 5-month scale. However, it was rare for allowances to fall below 5 months or exceed 10 months.

        This month-scale system applied not only to jagirs but also to cash salaries. Under Shah Jahan, agricultural expansion and increased cash crop production led to a rise in jama-dami (jagir income). However, this increase was proportional to the overall price rise. Notably, many Marathas inducted into Mughal service were given mansabs on a 5-monthly basis or even less, allowing them a high rank in name while effectively reducing their cavalry obligations. This severe reduction in the availability of remounts weakened the efficiency of the Mughal cavalry.

        The mansabdari system was complex and required the proper functioning of both the dagh (branding) system and the jagirdari system. If the dagh system was poorly enforced, the state suffered financial losses. Similarly, if jama-dami was exaggerated or jagirdars failed to receive their due salaries, discontent would arise, leading to poor military maintenance. However, under Shah Jahan, the system functioned effectively due to his meticulous administration and careful selection of competent officials, particularly wazirs. Strict discipline, clear promotion policies, and a well-structured rewards system ensured that the Mughal nobility remained loyal and efficient in both administration and military affairs, securing and expanding the empire.

    The Mughal Army
        The cavalry, as we have noted, was the principal arm of the Mughal army, and the mansabdars provided the overwhelming proportion of it. In addition to the mansabdars, the Mughal emperors used to entertain individual troopers called ahadis. The ahadis have been called gentlemen-troopers and received much higher salaries than other troopers. They were a highly trusted corps, being recruited directly by the emperors and having their own muster-master. An ahadi mustered up to five horses, though sometimes two of them shared a horse. The duties of ahadis were of a miscellaneous character. Most clerks of the imperial offices, the painters of the court, and the foremen in the royal karkhanas belonged to this corps. Many were appointed as adjutants and carriers of imperial orders. In Shah Jahan’s reign, they numbered 7,000 and were often sent into the fighting line, where they were well distributed over different parts of the army. Many of them worked as skilled musketeers (banduq-andaz) and bowmen (tir-andaz).

        In addition to the ahadis, the emperors maintained a corps of royal bodyguards (walashahis) and armed palace guards. They were cavalrymen but served on foot in the citadel and the palace.

        The footmen (piyadgan) formed a numerous but miscellaneous body. Many of them consisted of matchlock-bearers (banduqchis) and received salaries ranging between three and seven rupees a month. This was the infantry proper. But the foot soldiers also included porters, servants, news runners, swordsmen, wrestlers, and slaves. The slaves, though not as numerous as during the Sultanate period, were clothed and fed by the emperor or by a prince. Sometimes a slave could become a gentleman-trooper, but generally, foot soldiers had a low status.

        The Mughal emperors had a large stable of war elephants and also a well-organized park of artillery. The artillery consisted of two sections—heavy guns, which were used for defending or assaulting forts, and light artillery, which was highly mobile and moved with the emperor whenever he wanted. The Mughals were keen on improving their artillery, and at first, many Ottomans and Portuguese were employed in the artillery department. By the time of Aurangzeb, Mughal artillery had improved considerably, and foreigners found employment in the artillery department with difficulty.

        The big guns were sometimes extravagantly large in size, but as a modern writer says, “These huge guns made more noise than they did harm; they could not be fired many times in a day, and were very liable to burst and destroy the men in charge.” However, the Frenchman Bernier, who accompanied Shah Jahan to Lahore and Kashmir, found the light artillery, called the ‘artillery of the stirrup,’ to be extremely well-appointed. He says: “It consisted of fifty small field pieces, all of brass; each piece mounted on a well-made and handsomely painted carriage, containing two ammunition boxes, and drawn by two fine horses, with a third horse in reserve.” Artillery or swivel guns were also mounted on elephants and camels.

        It is difficult to estimate the strength of the Mughal army. Under Shah Jahan, it consisted of about 2,00,000 cavalry, excluding the men working in the districts and with faujdars. It rose to 2,40,000 under Aurangzeb. The infantry under Shah Jahan, excluding the non-fighting people, was placed at 40,000 and may have been maintained at a similar figure under Aurangzeb.

        How efficient was the Mughal army compared to the neighboring West and Central Asian states and the European states of the time? It is difficult to answer this question, though a number of European travelers, such as Bernier, have made adverse remarks about the efficiency of the Mughal army. A careful analysis shows that his remarks were really directed towards the Mughal infantry, which had no drill or discipline, was ill-organized and ill-led, and resembled a rabble. The development of the infantry had taken a different path in Europe. With the development of the flint-gun, the infantry became a formidable fighting force during the seventeenth century and could even outclass the cavalry, as the Indian powers were to realize to their cost during the eighteenth century.

        The success of the Mughals against the Uzbeks, who could match themselves with the Persians at the time of the Balkh campaigns, suggests that the Mughal army was not inferior to the Central Asian and Persian armies in an open contest. However, the armies of these states were backward compared to the Europeans, particularly in the fields of infantry and artillery. Though somewhat deficient in artillery, by the time of Aurangzeb, the Mughals had apparently caught up with the Asian powers—though not with the European sea-going powers. The Mughals, like other Asian powers (except Turkey and the Sultanate of Oman), were deficient in the naval sphere, particularly in sea warfare. The army as a whole, particularly the cavalry, was closely linked with the jagirdari system, which, in turn, was based on the feudal system of land relations prevalent in the country. Ultimately, the strength and efficiency of one depended on the other.

- Economic and Social Life under the Mughals
    Economic and Social Conditions
        The Mughal Empire reached its territorial zenith by the end of the seventeenth century. During this period, it had to face many political and administrative problems, some of which we have already discussed. In the economic and social spheres, the period from the advent of Akbar to the end of the seventeenth century may be treated as one since there were no fundamental changes, although there were important social and economic developments which we shall try to analyze.

        Standard of Living: Pattern of Village Life and the Masses

        During this period, many European traders and travelers came to India, and some of them have left accounts of the social and economic conditions of the country. In general, they have emphasized the wealth and prosperity of India and the ostentatious lifestyle of the ruling classes on the one hand, and on the other, the grinding poverty of the ordinary people—the peasants, artisans, and laborers. Babur was struck by the scanty clothes worn by the ordinary people. He observed that “peasants and people of low standing go about naked.” He then goes on to describe the angota or decency cloth worn by men and the sari worn by women. His impression has been corroborated by later European travelers. Ralph Fitch, who came to India towards the end of the sixteenth century, says that at Banaras, “the people go naked save a little cloth bound about their middle.” De Laet wrote that the laborers had insufficient clothing to keep themselves warm and cozy during winter. However, Fitch observed, “In the winter, which is our May, the men wear quilted gowns of cotton and quilted caps.”

        Similar remarks have been made about the use of footwear. Nikitin observed that the people of the Deccan went barefooted. A modern author, Moreland, says that he did not find a shoe mentioned anywhere north of the Narmada River, except in Bengal, and ascribes it to the high cost of leather.

        As far as housing and furniture were concerned, little need be said. The mud houses in which the villagers lived were not different from those at present. They had hardly any furniture except cots and bamboo mats and used earthen utensils made by the village potter. Copper and bell-metal plates and utensils were expensive and generally not used by the poor.

        Regarding food, rice, millet, and pulses (what Pelsaert and De Laet called dicheri) formed the staple diet, along with fish in Bengal and the coastal areas, and meat in the southern peninsula. In North India, chapatis made of wheat or coarse grains, along with pulses and green vegetables, were common. The ordinary people, it is said, ate their main meal in the evening and chewed pulses or other parched grains during the day. Ghee and oil were much cheaper than food grains then and seem to have been a staple part of the poor man’s diet. However, salt and sugar were more expensive.

        Thus, while people had fewer clothes to wear and shoes were too costly, on balance, they ate better. With more grazing land, they could keep more cattle, so more milk and milk products must have been available.

        The standard of living ultimately depended upon income and wages. It is difficult to determine the income of the large mass of peasants in real terms, for money hardly entered into transactions in the villages. The village artisans were paid for their services through commodities fixed by custom. It is difficult to compute the average size of a peasant’s landholding. The information available to us shows that there was a great deal of inequality in villages. The peasants who did not have their own plows and bullocks often tilled the land of the zamindars or the upper castes and could barely eke out a living. The landless peasants and laborers often belonged to the class of people called “untouchables” or famins.

        Whenever there was a famine—and famines were frequent—it was this class of peasants and village artisans who suffered the most. The peasants who owned the land they tilled were called khudkasht. They paid land revenue at customary rates. Some of them had many plows and bullocks, which they let out to their poorer brethren, the tenants or muzarian, who generally paid land revenue at a higher rate. These two groups formed the largest section of cultivators in the village.

        Thus, village society was highly unequal. The khudkasht, who claimed to be the original settlers of the village, often belonged to a single dominant caste or castes. These castes not only dominated village society but also exploited the weaker sections. In turn, they were often exploited by the zamindars.

        It has been estimated that the population of India at the beginning of the seventeenth century was about 125 million. Hence, there was plenty of cultivable land available, and it may be surmised that a peasant would cultivate as much land as his means and family circumstances would allow, subject to social restraints. Unlike many other countries in Asia and Africa, India had a well-diversified economy, cultivating a large variety of crops such as wheat, rice, gram, barley, pulses, and bajra, as well as cash crops like cotton, indigo, chay (red dye), sugarcane, and oilseeds. These crops paid land revenue at a higher rate and had to be paid for in cash. Hence, they were often called cash crops or superior crops. The peasants not only shifted cultivation from one crop to another depending on prices but were also willing to adopt new crops if they found it profitable. During the seventeenth century, two new crops—tobacco and maize—were introduced. Silk and tusser cultivation became so widespread in Bengal that there was no longer a need to import silk from China. The adoption of potatoes and red chilies happened in the eighteenth century.

        Despite the lack of new agricultural techniques, Indian agriculture was, on balance, efficient and played a significant role in the growth of the manufacturing sector and trade during the period. In medieval times, a peasant was not dispossessed of his land as long as he paid land revenue. He could also sell his land if he found a buyer, provided the community raised no objections. His children inherited his land as a matter of right after his death. However, state dues were heavy, sometimes amounting to nearly half of his produce, leaving the ordinary peasant with barely enough to survive. This made it difficult for them to invest in land improvement or cultivation expansion.

        Although the life of the peasant was hard, he had enough to eat and meet his basic needs. His lifestyle was dictated partly by the seasons and partly by customs and traditions, including fairs, pilgrimages, and ceremonies. The landless and a section of artisans, including menials, had much harder lives. However, not all peasants lived at this low level. Resident cultivators (khudkasht) had larger landholdings and often owned many plows and oxen for cultivation. They could also rent out part of their land to ordinary cultivators (muzarian) on profitable terms.

        These sections, along with village zamindars, invested in agricultural expansion and improvement.

        In cities, the largest section of the population consisted of the poor—artisans, servants, slaves, soldiers, and manual workers. According to European travelers, the salary of the lowest-grade servant was less than two rupees a month. The bulk of workers and foot soldiers began at less than three rupees a month. It has been calculated that a man could feed his family on two rupees a month. Moreland, writing in the early twentieth century, observed that real wages had remained unchanged since Mughal times—while workers had a more balanced diet, clothes, sugar, and other items had become more expensive.

        Moreland concluded that the conditions of the Indian people had not worsened under British rule. However, this needs to be examined in a broader context. While Europe saw vast increases in wealth and real wages during this period, India stagnated, if not declined, under British rule.

    The Ruling Classes: The Nobles and Zamindars
        The nobility, along with the landed gentry, the zamindars, formed what may be called the ruling class in medieval India. Socially and economically, the Mughal nobility formed a privileged class. Theoretically, the doors of the Mughal nobility were open to everyone. In practice, persons belonging to aristocratic families, whether they were Indians or foreigners, had a decided advantage.

        To begin with, the bulk of the Mughal nobles were drawn from the homeland of the Mughals—Turan—and from its neighboring areas, such as Tajikistan, Khurasan, and Iran. Although Babur was a Turk, the Mughal rulers never followed a narrow racist policy. Babur tried to win the leading Afghan nobles to his side, but they proved to be restless and untrustworthy and soon defected. The tussle between the Mughals and the Afghans continued in Bihar and Bengal even under Akbar. However, from the time of Jahangir, more Afghans began to be recruited into the nobility. Indian Muslims, known as Shaikhzadas or Hindustanis, were also given service.

        From the time of Akbar, Hindus also began to be inducted into the nobility on a regular basis. The largest section among them consisted of the Rajputs. Initially, among the Rajputs, the Kachhwahas predominated. According to modern calculations, the proportion of Hindus in the nobility under Akbar in 1594 was about 16 percent. However, these figures do not provide an adequate idea of the position and influence of Hindus. Both Raja Man Singh and Raja Birbal were personal friends and close companions of Akbar, while in revenue administration, Raja Todar Mal held a place of great influence and honor. The Rajputs who were recruited to the nobility were either hereditary rajas or belonged to aristocratic families related to or allied with the raja. Thus, their incorporation into the nobility strengthened its aristocratic character.

        Despite this, the nobility did provide an avenue of promotion and distinction to individuals from the lower sections of society. Many Kayasthas and Khatris were employed at various levels in the central and provincial governments, and a few of them were elevated to the position of nobles. Some individuals of humble origins even attained the status of mansabdars.

        The nobility attained considerable stability under Jahangir and Shah Jahan. Both these monarchs paid careful attention to the organization of the nobility through the mansabdari system. Rules and regulations were established for orderly promotions, discipline, and the recruitment of competent people into the imperial service.

        The Mughal nobles, as mentioned earlier, received salaries that were extremely high by any standards. This, along with the liberal policy of the Mughal emperors in matters of faith and the stable political conditions in India, attracted many talented individuals from foreign lands to the Mughal court. As a result, there was a reverse brain drain. Due to the influx of Iranis, Turanis, and others in search of service at the Mughal court, a French traveler, Bernier, remarked that the Mughal nobility consisted of “foreigners who enticed each other to the court.” However, modern research has shown this statement to be inaccurate. While talented individuals continued to migrate to India and rise to prominence in Mughal service, they all settled in India permanently. Thus, just like in earlier periods, India continued to provide a home for many people from outside. These immigrants quickly assimilated into Indian society and culture while retaining some of their distinctive traits. This contributed to the richness and diversity of Indian culture.

        Under Jahangir and Shah Jahan, the majority of the nobles were already those born in India. Simultaneously, the proportion of Afghans, Indian Muslims (Hindustanis), and Hindus in the nobility continued to rise. A new section among the Hindus that entered the nobility during this period were the Marathas. Jahangir was the first monarch to recognize the importance of the Marathas in the Deccan and sought to win them over to his side. This policy was continued by Shah Jahan. Among the Maratha sardars who served Shah Jahan was Shahji, the father of Shivaji, although he later defected. Aurangzeb also recruited many Marathas and Deccani Muslims into his service.

        We shall discuss Mughal relations with the Marathas in a later section. However, it is worth noting that while Hindus formed roughly 24 percent of the nobility under Shah Jahan, their proportion rose to about 33 percent during the second half of Aurangzeb’s reign, with their total number increasing four and a half times. Among the Hindu nobles, the Marathas made up more than half during Aurangzeb’s reign.

        Although the Mughal nobles received extremely high salaries, their expenses were also substantial. Each noble maintained a large retinue of servants and attendants, as well as a sizable stable of horses, elephants, and other forms of transport. Many of them maintained large harems, which was considered normal for a man of status in those times. The nobles imitated the Mughal emperors in leading a highly ostentatious lifestyle. They lived in magnificent houses with gardens containing fruit trees and running water. They wore the finest clothes and spent lavishly on their meals. According to one account, 40 dishes were prepared for each of Akbar’s meals. A significant amount was spent on fruits, with the choicest varieties being imported from Samarqand and Bokhara.

        Ice, which was considered a luxury, was used year-round by the privileged classes. Jewelry and ornaments, worn by both men and women, were another major expenditure. Jahangir introduced the fashion of men wearing expensive earrings after piercing their ears. To some extent, jewelry also served as a financial reserve for emergencies. Another major expense was the mandatory presents to the emperor, which had to be given twice a year. However, the value of these gifts was fixed according to the individual’s status, and in return, nobles received gifts from the emperor.

        Although extravagant spending rather than hoarding was the dominant characteristic of the ruling class, only a few nobles managed to remain debt-free and leave large inheritances for their children. Despite this, the nobility contributed significantly to the economy, both directly and indirectly. Many nobles purchased land or received land grants from the emperor, settling in these areas and developing orchards or building covered markets (mandis) that generated rental and sales income. They also lent money on interest to traders or engaged in trade, often in the name of merchants or in partnership with them. In a remarkable passage, Abul Fazl advised nobles to “invest a little in commercial speculation and engage in remunerative undertakings.” Although Islamic law condemned usury, Abul Fazl encouraged nobles to invest money on interest, reflecting contemporary values.

        It is difficult to determine the precise share of the nobility in the commercial enterprises of the period. At times, some nobles, including royal princes, misused their positions to monopolize the sale and purchase of certain goods or to coerce artisans and traders into selling their goods and services at lower prices. However, such instances were not widespread enough to significantly impact trade, commerce, or artistic production.

        An English factor at Surat remarked in 1614 that “large and small are merchants.” Even members of the royal family, including princes, princesses, and royal ladies, participated in trade by freighting goods on foreign ships or even owning ships themselves. Mir Jumla, a prominent nobleman during Aurangzeb’s reign, owned a fleet of ships that carried out extensive trade with Persia, Arabia, and Southeast Asia. The lure of commercial profits reached such an extent that even Aurangzeb’s chief qazi had significant commercial interests, which he attempted to conceal from the emperor. Thus, the Mughal nobility had a number of unusual features.

        Though often divided along ethnic lines, the Mughal nobility formed a composite ruling class representing different regions and religions. It also sought to promote a shared culture by extending patronage to painters, musicians, poets—both Persian and Hindawi—and scholars. Though essentially feudal in character, as land was its primary source of income, it had also developed many characteristics of a bureaucracy. Additionally, it was becoming increasingly commerce- and money-minded.

        Thus, the Mughal state and ruling class did not act as a barrier to India’s economic development. Whether this development could, by itself, have led India toward a capitalist path is debatable, but we need not enter into that discussion here. Our main concern is to examine whether the economy continued to grow during this period and, if so, the direction of its development.

        The rapid expansion of the nobility during the seventeenth century, tensions between different groups, individuals, and factions, and a crisis in the functioning of the sagirdari system had an adverse effect on discipline and the effective operation of the nobility under Aurangzeb and his successors. Some of these aspects are examined in greater detail in a subsequent chapter.

    Zamindars and the Rural Gentry
        From the writings of Abul Fazl and other contemporary authors, it is clear that personal ownership of land had existed in India for a long time. The right of ownership in land primarily depended on heredity, but new rights of ownership were constantly being created. The tradition was that anyone who first brought land under cultivation was considered its owner. There was plenty of cultivable wasteland (banjar) available in medieval times. It was not difficult for an enterprising group of people to settle a new village or bring wastelands belonging to a village under cultivation and become the owners of these lands. In addition to owning the lands they cultivated, a significant section of the zamindars had the hereditary right to collect land revenue from a number of villages. This was called their taluqa or zamindari. For collecting the land revenue, the zamindars received a share, which could go up to 25% in some areas. However, the zamindar was not the owner of all the land in his zamindari. The peasants who actually cultivated the land could not be dispossessed as long as they paid the land revenue. Thus, both the zamindars and the peasants had their own hereditary rights in land.

        Above the zamindars were the rajas, who dominated larger or smaller territories and enjoyed varying degrees of internal autonomy. These rajas were also referred to as zamindars by Persian writers to emphasize their subordinate status, but their position was superior to that of the ordinary zamindars who collected land revenue. Thus, medieval society, including rural society, was highly segmented and hierarchical.

        The zamindars, rajas, and chiefs had their own armed forces and generally lived in forts or garhis, which served as both places of refuge and status symbols. The combined forces of these groups, collectively called zamindars in medieval sources, were significant. According to the Ain-i-Akbari, during Akbar’s reign, they possessed 3,84,558 cavalry, 42,77,057 foot soldiers, 1,863 elephants, and 4,260 cannons. However, since the zamindars were dispersed, they could never field such large forces at any one time or in a single location.

        The zamindars generally had close connections with the peasants in their zamindaris, often based on caste, clan, or tribal ties. They also had considerable local knowledge about land productivity. The zamindars formed a powerful and numerous class, found throughout the country under different names such as deshmukh, patil, nayak, etc. Thus, it was not easy for any central authority to ignore or alienate them.

        It is difficult to determine the exact living standards of the zamindars. Compared to the nobles, their income was limited; the smaller zamindars may have lived much like the peasants. However, the larger zamindars likely had living standards similar to those of petty rajas or nobles. Most of the zamindars lived in the countryside, forming a loosely organized, dispersed rural gentry.

        It would be incorrect to view the zamindars merely as those who fought for control over land and exploited cultivators. Many zamindars had close caste and kinship ties with the landowning cultivating castes in their zamindaris. They not only set social standards but also provided capital and organization for establishing new villages and expanding or improving cultivation.

    The Middle Strata
        There has been much discussion on whether medieval India had a middle class. The French traveler Bernier claimed that India had no “middle state”—a person was either extremely rich or lived in misery. However, this statement is not entirely accurate. If the term middle class refers to traders and shopkeepers, then India had a large class of wealthy traders and merchants, some of whom were among the richest in the world at that time. These merchants had traditional rights, including protection of life and property. However, unlike their European counterparts, they did not have the right to administer towns. In Europe, merchants acquired such rights under special circumstances, but these were often curtailed whenever strong territorial states emerged, as in France and Britain.

        If middle state refers to a section of society whose standard of living was between the rich and the poor, then such groups were indeed present in Mughal India. These included small mansabdars, petty shopkeepers, and a small but significant class of master craftsmen. It also comprised professionals such as hakims (physicians), leading musicians and artists, historians, scholars, qazis (judges), theologians, and a large number of petty officials or clerks who managed the vast Mughal administrative machinery. While petty officials were generally paid in cash and supplemented their income through corruption, many others, especially scholars and religious figures, were granted small landholdings for sustenance. These grants were known as madad-i-maash in Mughal terminology and sasan in Rajasthan. Such grants were typically renewed by each ruler but often became hereditary in practice. These individuals often formed part of the rural gentry, serving as a link between villages and towns. Writers, historians, and theologians frequently came from this class. However, the middle strata did not constitute a single class; their interests varied significantly. They were also drawn from various religious and caste groups, further emphasizing the diversity of medieval Indian society.

    ORGANIZATION OF TRADE AND COMMERCE
        The Indian trading classes were large in numbers, spread out all over the country, well organized, and highly professional. Some specialized in long-distance, inter-regional trade, and some in local, retail trade. The former were called seth, bora, or modi, while the latter were called deoparis or banik. In addition to retailing goods, the baniks had their own agents in the villages and townships, with whose help they purchased foodgrains and cash crops. There was a special class of traders, the banjaras, who specialized in carrying bulk goods. The banjaras used to move over long distances, sometimes with thousands of oxen carrying foodgrains, pulses, ghee, salt, etc. The more expensive goods, such as textiles, silks, etc., were laden on camels and mules or in carts. But it was cheaper to move bulk goods through the rivers on boats. Boat traffic on waterways and coastal trade along the seashore were more highly developed than now. The trade in foodstuffs and a wide range of textile products were the most important components of inter-regional trade during the period. Bengal exported sugar and rice as well as delicate muslin and silk. The coast of Coromandel had become a center for textile production and had a brisk trade with Gujarat, both along the coast and across the Deccan. Gujarat was the entry point of foreign goods. It exported fine textiles and silks (patola) to North India, with Burhanpur and Agra as the two nodal points of trade. It received foodgrains and silk from Bengal and also imported pepper from Malabar. North India imported luxury items and also exported indigo and foodgrains. Lahore was another center of handicraft production. It was also the distribution center for the luxury products of Kashmir—shawls, carpets, etc. The products of Punjab and Sindh moved down the river Indus. It had close trade links with Kabul and Qandahar on the one hand and with Delhi and Agra on the other.

        It will thus be seen that India’s inter-regional trade was not in luxuries alone. The movement of these goods was made possible by complex networks linking wholesalers with merchants down to the regional and local levels through agents (gumashtas) and commission agents (dalals). The Dutch and English traders who came to Gujarat during the seventeenth century found the Indian traders to be active and alert. There was keen competition for inside information, and whenever there was demand for goods in one part of the country, it was rapidly met.

        Movement of goods was also facilitated by the growth of a financial system that permitted easy transmission of money from one part of the country to another. This was done through the use of hundis. The hundi was a letter of credit payable after a period of time at a discount. The hundis often included insurance, which was charged at different rates based on the value of the goods, destination, means of transport (land, river, or sea), etc. The sarrafs (shroffs), who specialized in changing money, also dealt with hundis. In the process, they acted as private banks: they kept money in deposit from the nobles and lent it. By means of hundis, they created credit, which supplemented the money in circulation, since the merchant could cash his hundi after he had sold his goods at the point of his destination. Thus, movement of money, which was always a risky enterprise, could be reduced, especially when rich traders such as Virji Vohra set up agency houses in different parts of India, and also in West Asia and Southeast Asia.

        The trading community in India did not belong to one caste or religion. The Gujarati merchants included Hindus, Jains, and Muslims, who were mostly Bohras. In Rajasthan, Oswals, Maheshwaris, and Agarwals began to be called Marwaris. Overland trade to Central Asia was in the hands of Multanis, Afghans, and Khatris. The Marwaris spread out to Maharashtra and Bengal during the eighteenth century. The Chettis on the Coromandel coast and the Muslim merchants of Malabar, both Indian and Arab, formed the most important trading communities of South India.

        The trading community in India, especially in the port towns, included some of the richest merchants, comparable in wealth and power to the merchant princes of Europe. Thus, Virji Vohra dominated the Surat trade for several decades. He owned a large fleet of ships and was reputed to be among the wealthiest men of his time. Abdul Ghafur Bohra left 55 lakh rupees in cash and goods and a fleet of 17 sea-going ships at the time of his death in 1718. Similarly, Malay Chetti of the Coromandel coast, Kashi Viranna, and Sunca Rama Chetti were reputed to be extremely wealthy and had extensive commercial dealings in India and abroad. There were many wealthy merchants at Agra, Delhi, Balasore (Orissa), and Bengal as well. Some of these merchants, especially those living in the coastal towns, lived ostentatiously and imitated the manners of the nobles.

        European travelers mention the commodious and well-built houses in which the wealthy merchants of Agra and Delhi lived. But the ordinary merchants lived in houses above their shops. The French traveler, Bernier, says that merchants tried to look poor because they feared being treated like "filled sponges," i.e., squeezed of their wealth. This does not appear to be fully correct. Emperors from the time of Sher Shah passed many laws for protecting the property of merchants. The laws of Sher Shah are well known. Jahangir’s ordinances included a provision that if anyone, whether unbeliever or Muslim, should die, his property and effects should be left for his heirs, and no one should interfere with them. If he had no heirs, inspectors and separate guardians would be appointed to guard the property so that its value might be expended in lawful expenditures, such as building mosques and sarais, repairing broken bridges, and digging tanks and wells. However, local officials could always abuse their power to harass traders. Despite some harassment, the property of merchants was generally safe. Means of transport were cheap and adequate for their needs. Despite complaints by some European travelers, safety on the roads was satisfactory and could be covered by insurance. The means of travel, with sarais at distances of 5 kos on principal highways, was as good as in Europe at the time. Nevertheless, trade and traders continued to have a low social status. The influence of merchants on political processes is a matter of controversy. Merchants in India were not without influence in political quarters where their interests were concerned. Thus, each community of merchants had its leader or nagarseth, who could intercede with local officials on their behalf. We do have instances of strikes (hartal) by merchants in Ahmedabad and elsewhere to press their points of view. We have also noted the involvement of members of the Mughal royal family and prominent nobles, such as Mir Jumla, in trade. Thus, the Mughal ruling class was not unconcerned with business and the protection of commercial interests, though it was not as actively involved in pushing its business interests as some European states such as Britain, France, and Holland were.

        Trade and commerce expanded in India during the seventeenth century due to several factors. An important factor was the political integration of the country under Mughal rule and the establishment of conditions of law and order over extensive areas. The Mughals paid attention to roads and sarais. Taxes were levied on goods at the point of their entry into the empire. Road cesses or rahdari was declared illegal, though some local rajas continued to collect it. The Mughals minted silver rupees of high purity from mints scattered all over the empire. Any trader could carry silver to the royal mint and have coins in exchange on payment of a batta (discount). The Mughal rupee became a standard coin in India and abroad, thus helping India’s trade.

        Some of the Mughal policies also helped in the commercialization of the economy, or the growth of a money economy. Salaries for the standing army as well as many of the administrative personnel (but not the nobles) were paid in cash. Under the zabti system, land revenue was assessed and required to be paid in cash. Even when the peasant was given the option of choosing other methods of assessment, such as crop-sharing, the state’s share was generally sold in the villages with the help of grain dealers. It has been estimated that about 20 percent of the rural produce was marketed, which was a high proportion. The growth of rural grain markets led to the rise of small townships or qasbas. The demand for all types of luxury goods by the nobles led to the expansion of handicraft production and the growth of towns.

        Already during the sixteenth century, a number of major towns had developed in the country. According to Ralph Fitch, Agra and Fatehpur Sikri were larger than London, then one of the biggest towns in Europe. Monserrate, the Jesuit priest who came to Akbar’s court, said that Lahore was second to none among the cities of Europe or Asia. A recent study shows that Agra more than doubled in size during the seventeenth century. Bernier, who wrote in the middle of the seventeenth century, stated that Delhi was not smaller than Paris and that Agra was bigger than Delhi. During this period, Ahmadnagar and Burhanpur in the west, Multan in the northwest, and Patna, Rajmahal, and Dacca in the east grew to become large towns. Ahmedabad was as large as London and its suburbs, and Patna had a population of two lakhs—a large size by the standards of those times. These towns were not only administrative centers but also developed as centers of trade and manufacture.

        The Mughal ability to collect a high share of the rural produce, which was commuted into money and concentrated in the hands of the nobility, stimulated the demand for all kinds of luxury goods, including building materials for residential houses, sarais, baolis, etc. The growth of arms manufacturing—guns of all types, cannons, armor, etc.—and shipbuilding were two primary examples of direct government intervention in these industries. Both Akbar and Aurangzeb were deeply interested in the manufacture of guns of all types, including mobile guns, and took steps to improve their production. Indian steel swords were also in demand outside India.

        In 1651, Shah Jahan initiated a program for building sea-going vessels, and four to six ships were built each year for voyages to West Asia. In the following year, six ships were put into commission. This was part of a shipbuilding program led by many wealthy merchants and nobles. As a result, Indian shipyards were soon in a position to produce ships based on European models, and freight rates to West Asia were reduced.

    Foreign Trade and the European Traders
        We have already mentioned that there were several ports and towns from which brisk trade between India and the outer world was carried on. India not only supplied foodstuffs, such as sugar and rice, to many countries of Southeast and West Asia, but Indian textiles also played a very important role in the trade of the region. As an English agent observed, “From Aden to Achin, from head to foot, everyone was clothed in Indian textiles.” This statement, although slightly exaggerated (as Egypt and Ottoman Turkey also produced cotton and exported textiles), was essentially true. This made India the virtual manufactory of the Asian world (excluding China). The only articles India needed to import were certain metals, such as tin and copper, whose production was insufficient (tin was used for making bronze), some spices for food and medicinal purposes, warhorses, and luxury items (such as ivory). The favorable balance of trade was met by the import of gold and silver.

        As a result of the expansion of India’s foreign trade, the import of silver and gold into India increased during the seventeenth century. So much so that Bernier remarked, “Gold and silver, after circulating over every part of the world, is finally buried in India, which is the sink of gold and silver.” This statement is also somewhat exaggerated because, in those days, every country tried to hold on to its gold and silver. However, India and China were more successful in doing so due to the scale of their economies and their largely self-sufficient nature.

        We have already discussed the advent of the Portuguese in India towards the end of the fifteenth century. During the seventeenth century, many other European traders, especially the Dutch, the English, and later the French, came to India for trade. This enterprise was a direct result of the growth of the European economy, which followed a rapid expansion in agriculture and manufacturing.

        The Portuguese power had begun to decline during the second half of the sixteenth century. Despite vehement Portuguese opposition, the Dutch established themselves at Masulipatam, obtaining a farman from the ruler of Golconda in 1606. They also established themselves in the Spice Islands (Java and Sumatra), and by 1610, they dominated the spice trade. The Dutch originally came to the coast for the spice trade but quickly realized that spices could be obtained most easily in exchange for Indian textiles. The cloth produced on the Coromandel Coast was the most acceptable in Southeast Asia and also the cheapest to carry. Hence, the Dutch spread south from Masulipatam to the Coromandel Coast, obtaining Pulicat from the local ruler and making it their base of operations.

        Like the Dutch, the English also came to the East for the spice trade. However, the hostility of the Dutch, who had more resources and had already established themselves in the Spice Islands, forced the English to concentrate on India. After defeating a Portuguese fleet outside Surat, they were finally able to set up a factory there in 1612. This was confirmed in 1618 by a farman from Jahangir, obtained with the help of Sir Thomas Roe. The Dutch followed, and soon they too established a factory at Surat.

        The English quickly realized the importance of Gujarat as a center for India’s export trade in textiles. They attempted to break into India’s trade with the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf ports. In 1622, with the help of the Persian forces, they captured Ormuz, the Portuguese base at the head of the Persian Gulf.

        Thus, by the first quarter of the seventeenth century, both the Dutch and the English were well established in Indian trade, and Portuguese control of the sea was broken forever. The Portuguese remained at Goa, Daman, and Diu, but their share in India’s overseas trade declined continuously.

        Recent research has shown that, despite their dominance at sea, the Europeans were never able to oust Indian traders from Asian trade. In fact, the share of European trading companies from any part of India—Gujarat, Coromandel, or Bengal—remained a fraction of India’s foreign trade. Indian traders were able to maintain their position for several reasons: when it came to the textile trade, Indian traders knew both the domestic and foreign markets better. Additionally, Indians were willing to work at lower profit margins of 10 to 15 percent, whereas the Dutch considered 40 to 50 percent as the minimum to meet their overhead costs, including the maintenance of factories and warships. The English approach must have been similar. The Dutch and the English found that they could not trade in India, or even sustain their factories, without the cooperation of the Mughal government and Indian traders. To reduce their operational costs, they started freighting Indian merchants’ goods on their ships. Indian traders had little objection to this, as it made their operations safer. At the same time, Indian shipping expanded significantly. From about 50 ships in the middle of the seventeenth century at Surat—many of them well-built—its numbers rose to at least 112 by the end of the century. This was another indicator of the growth of India’s foreign trade and domestic manufacturing.

        Apart from participating in Asian trade, the English and the Dutch searched for articles that could be exported from India to Europe. Initially, the most important trade, apart from pepper, was indigo, which was used to dye woolens. The most suitable indigo was produced at Sarkhej in Gujarat and Bayana near Agra. Soon, the English developed the export of Indian textiles, called ‘calicoes,’ to Europe. Initially, the produce of Gujarat was sufficient for this purpose. As demand grew, the English sought cloth from Agra and its surroundings. Even this was not enough, leading them to develop the Coromandel Coast as an alternative source of supply. By 1640, exports of cloth from the Coromandel equaled those from Gujarat, and by 1660, they were three times higher. Masulipatam and Fort St. George, which later became Madras, were the chief ports for this trade.

        The Dutch joined the English in this new venture, exporting both calico and indigo from the Coromandel.

        The English also explored Lahri Bandar at the mouth of the Indus River, which could draw the produce of Multan and Lahore by transporting goods down the river. However, this trade remained secondary to the Gujarat trade. More important were their efforts to develop trade in Bengal and Orissa. The activities of the Portuguese and Magh pirates in East Bengal slowed this development. However, by 1650, the English had established themselves at Hooghly and Balasore in Orissa, exporting raw silk and sugar in addition to textiles. Another major export item was saltpeter, which supplemented European sources for gunpowder and was also used as ballast for ships bound for Europe. The best quality saltpeter was found in Bihar. By the end of the century, exports from the eastern regions equaled those from the Coromandel.

        Thus, the English and Dutch companies opened new markets and export opportunities for India. Indian textiles became a rage in England by the last quarter of the seventeenth century. As an English observer wrote, “Almost everything that used to be made of wool or silk, whether related to women’s dress or household furniture, was supplied by Indian trade.” Due to agitation, in 1701, “all calicoes painted, dyed, printed, or stained” from Persia, China, or the East Indies (i.e., India) were banned. However, these and other laws imposing severe penalties had little effect. Instead of printed cloth, the export of white Indian calicoes, which had risen to 9.14 lakh pieces in 1701, jumped to 20 lakh pieces in 1719.

        Although India’s trade with Europe grew rapidly during the second half of the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, intra-Asian trade remained much more lucrative. It is estimated that only 14 percent of the spices produced were exported to Europe, with most being consumed in India and China. During the seventeenth century, India’s textile exports to West Asia and East Africa also grew. A new trade item, coffee, was produced in Yemen (Southern Arabia).

        Lahore and Multan were major centers for India’s overland trade. A large colony of Indian traders, amounting to 10,000, lived in different parts of Iran and spread to Bokhara, Samarkand, and even South Russia. Indian traders had colonies at Baku and Astrakhan, trading up to Moscow. There were also traders in Yarkand and Khotan (modern Xinjiang), facilitating trade from Punjab via Kashmir and Ladakh to China. However, overland trade declined with the collapse of the Safavid Empire and the disintegration of the Mughal Empire.

        The growth of India’s foreign trade, the influx of gold and silver into the country, and the linking of India more closely with the rapidly expanding European markets had a number of important consequences. While the Indian economy grew, the influx of silver and gold into the country was even faster. As a result, during the first half of the seventeenth century, prices almost doubled. The effect of this price rise on different sections of society has yet to be worked out in detail. It probably weakened the old traditional ties in the villages and made the nobility more money-minded, greedy, and demanding.

        Secondly, the European nations searched for alternatives to the export of gold and silver to India. One method was to enter the Asian trade network by trying to monopolize the spice trade and capture the Indian trade in textiles. As we have seen, they had only limited success in these fields. Hence, they tried to acquire empires in India and its neighborhood so that they could pay for the goods exported to Europe from the revenues of these territories. The Dutch were able to conquer Java and Sumatra. But the key was India. Both the English and the French competed for the conquest of India, but they could not succeed as long as India remained strong and united—first under Mughal rule and then under able provincial governors. They could only succeed when internal and external factors weakened even these states.


- Cultural and Religious Developments
    There was an outburst of many-sided cultural activity in India under Mughal rule. The traditions in the fields of architecture, painting, literature, and music created during this period set a norm and deeply influenced succeeding generations. In this sense, the Mughal period can be called a second classical age, following the Gupta age in northern India. In this cultural development, Indian traditions were amalgamated with the Turko-Iranian culture brought to the country by the Mughals. The Timurid court at Samarqand had developed as the cultural center of West and Central Asia. Babur was conscious of this cultural heritage. He was critical of many cultural forms existing in India and was determined to set proper standards.

    The development of art and culture in various regions of India during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries had led to a rich and varied cultural landscape, which the Mughals could draw upon. Without this foundation, the cultural efflorescence of the Mughal age would hardly have been possible. People from different regions of India, as well as those belonging to different faiths and races, contributed to this cultural development in various ways. In this sense, the culture developed during this period tended towards a composite national culture.

    Architecture
        The Mughals built magnificent forts, palaces, gates, public buildings, mosques, and baolis (step-wells). They also laid out many formal gardens with running water. In fact, the use of running water even in their palaces and pleasure resorts was a special feature of Mughal architecture. Babur was very fond of gardens and laid out a few in the neighborhoods of Agra and Lahore. Some of the Mughal gardens, such as Nishat Bagh in Kashmir, Shalimar Bagh in Lahore, and Pinjore Garden in the Punjab foothills, have survived to this day.

        A new impetus to architecture was given by Sher Shah. His famous mausoleum at Sasaram (Bihar) and his mosque in the Old Fort at Delhi are considered architectural marvels. They mark the climax of the pre-Mughal style of architecture and the starting point for the new Mughal style.

        Akbar was the first Mughal ruler who had the time and resources to undertake large-scale construction. He built a series of forts, the most famous of which is the Agra Fort. Built in red sandstone, this massive fort had many magnificent gates. For their forts, the Mughals drew upon the developed Indian tradition of fort-building, such as the ones at Gwalior and Jodhpur. The climax of fort-building was reached in Delhi, where Shah Jahan built the famous Red Fort.

        In 1572, Akbar commenced a palace-cum-fort complex at Fatehpur Sikri, 36 kilometers from Agra, which he completed in eight years. Built atop a hill, along with a large artificial lake, it included many buildings in the styles of Gujarat and Bengal, featuring deep eaves, balconies, and ornate kiosks. The Panch Mahal, built for taking in fresh air, used various types of pillars seen in Indian temples to support its flat roofs. The Gujarat style of architecture was most widely used in the palace, probably built for his Rajput wife or wives. Similar buildings were also constructed in Agra Fort, though only a few have survived. Akbar took a keen personal interest in construction work, both at Agra and Fatehpur Sikri.

        Persian and Central Asian influences can be seen in the glazed blue tiles used for wall decoration and roofing. However, the most magnificent building was the Jama Masjid and its grand entrance, the Buland Darwaza (the “Lofty Gate”), built to commemorate Akbar’s victory in Gujarat. The gate was built in the half-dome portal style, an architectural feature borrowed from Iran. This style involved slicing a dome in half, using the sliced portion to create a massive outward facade while placing smaller doors in the rear wall where the dome and floor met. This technique became a defining feature of later Mughal architecture.

        With the consolidation of the empire, Mughal architecture reached its climax. Towards the end of Jahangir’s reign, builders began using marble instead of sandstone and decorating walls with floral designs made of semi-precious stones. This method, called pietra dura, became even more popular under Shah Jahan, who used it extensively in the Taj Mahal, a masterpiece of Mughal architecture.

        The Taj Mahal skillfully combined all the architectural forms developed by the Mughals. Humayun’s Tomb, built in Delhi at the beginning of Akbar’s reign, with its massive marble dome, is considered a precursor to the Taj. The double-dome technique, which allowed for a larger outer dome with a smaller inner dome, was another innovation of the time. The chief glory of the Taj Mahal is its massive dome and the four slender minarets connecting the platform to the main building. The decorations are kept to a minimum, with delicate marble screens, pietra dura inlay work, and chhatris (domed kiosks) adding to its grandeur. The Taj gains further beauty from its setting within a formal garden.

        Mosque-building also reached its peak under Shah Jahan. The two most noteworthy examples are:
            •	The Moti Masjid in the Agra Fort, built entirely of marble like the Taj Mahal.
            •	The Jama Masjid in Delhi, built in red sandstone, featuring a lofty entrance gate, tall slender minarets, and a series of domes.

        Although Aurangzeb was more economy-minded and did not construct many buildings, Mughal architectural traditions continued into the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. The Mughal influence is evident in the palaces and forts of many provincial and local kingdoms. Even the Harmandir Sahib, also known as the Golden Temple in Amritsar, was rebuilt multiple times during this period. It was constructed using the arch-and-dome principle and incorporated many elements of Mughal architecture.

    PAINTING
        The Mughals made a distinctive contribution to the field of painting.
        They introduced new themes depicting the court, battle scenes, and the chase, and added new colors and new forms. They created a living tradition of painting that continued to thrive in different parts of the country long after the glory of the Mughals had faded.

        The richness of the Mughal style was due, in part, to India’s long tradition of painting. The wall paintings of Ajanta serve as eloquent evidence of its vigor. Although the tradition seemed to decline after the eighth century, palm-leaf manuscripts and illustrated Jain texts from the thirteenth century onwards show that it had not disappeared entirely.

        Apart from the Jains, some provincial kingdoms, such as Malwa and Gujarat, extended their patronage to painting during the fifteenth century. However, a vigorous revival began only under Akbar. While at the court of the Shah of Iran, Humayun had taken into his service two master painters who accompanied him to India. Under their leadership, during Akbar’s reign, a painting workshop was set up in one of the imperial establishments (havbhanas). A large number of painters, many from the lower castes, were drawn from different parts of the country. From the beginning, both Hindus and Muslims participated in this artistic endeavor. Notable painters of Akbar’s court included Daswant and Basawan. The school developed rapidly and soon became a celebrated center of artistic production.

        Initially, Mughal painters illustrated Persian books of fables, but they were soon assigned the task of illustrating the Persian text of the Mahabharata, the historical work Akbar Nama, and others. Indian themes, scenes, and landscapes thus became popular, helping to free the Mughal school from Persian influence. Indian colors, such as peacock blue and Indian red, were incorporated. Moreover, the somewhat flat effect of the Persian style was gradually replaced by the roundedness of the Indian brush, giving the paintings a three-dimensional effect.

        Mughal painting reached its climax under Jahangir, who had a highly discerning eye for art. It became a practice in the Mughal school for different artists to paint the faces, bodies, and feet of figures in a single picture. Jahangir claimed that he could distinguish the work of each artist in a painting.

        In addition to hunting, battle, and court scenes, Jahangir’s reign saw remarkable progress in portrait painting and depictions of animals. The artist Mansur was especially renowned in this field. Portrait painting also became highly fashionable.

        Under Akbar, European painting was introduced to the Mughal court by Portuguese priests. Their influence led to the adoption of foreshortening, a technique that allowed for a more realistic representation of depth and perspective.

        Although the tradition continued under Shah Jahan, Aurangzeb’s lack of interest in painting led to the dispersal of artists to different parts of the country. This, however, contributed to the development of painting in the states of Rajasthan and the Punjab hills. The Mughal tradition of painting was revived in the eighteenth century under the patronage of Aurangzeb’s successors.

        The Rajasthani style of painting combined the themes and earlier traditions of the Western Indian or Jain school with Mughal forms and styles. In addition to hunting and court scenes, Rajasthani painting also depicted mythological themes, such as Krishna’s dalliance with Radha, the Barahmasa (seasons), and the Ragas (melodies). The Pahari school continued these artistic traditions.

    LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, AND MUSIC
        The important role of Persian and Sanskrit as vehicles of thought and government at the all-India level, and the development of regional languages, largely as a result of the growth of the Bhakti Movement, have already been mentioned. Regional languages also developed due to the patronage extended to them by local and regional rulers.

        These trends continued during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. By the time of Akbar, knowledge of Persian had become so widespread in North India that he dispensed with the tradition of keeping revenue records in the local language (Hindavi) in addition to Persian. However, the tradition of keeping revenue records in the local language continued in the Deccani states until their extinction in the last quarter of the seventeenth century.

        Persian prose and poetry reached a climax under Akbar’s reign. Abul Fazl, who was a great scholar and stylist, as well as the leading historian of the age, set a style of prose writing that was emulated for many generations. The leading poet of the age was his brother, Faizi, who also helped in Akbar’s translation department. The translation of the Mahabharata was carried out under his supervision. Utbi and Naziri were two other leading Persian poets. Though born in Persia, they were among the many poets and scholars who migrated from Iran to India during the period and made the Mughal court one of the cultural centers of the Islamic world. Hindus also contributed to the growth of Persian literature. Apart from literary and historical works, a number of famous dictionaries of the Persian language were also compiled during the period.

        The number of Sanskrit works produced during the period is quite impressive. As before, most of the works were produced in South and East India under the patronage of local rulers, but the main center was Banaras, where scholars from different parts of the country used to congregate. A few works were produced by Brahmins employed in the translation department of the Mughal emperors.

        Regional languages acquired stability and maturity, and some of the finest lyrical poetry was produced during this period. The dalliance of Krishna with Radha and the milkmaids, the pranks of the child Krishna, and stories from the Bhagavata Purana figure largely in lyrical poetry in Bengali, Oriya, Hindi, Rajasthani, and Gujarati during this period. Many devotional hymns to Rama were also composed, and the Ramayana and the Mahabharata were translated into regional languages, especially where they had not been translated earlier. A few translations and adaptations from Persian were also made. Both Hindus and Muslims contributed to this. Thus, Alaol composed in Bengali and also translated from Persian. In Hindi, the Padmavat, the story written by the Sufi saint Malik Muhammad Jayasi, used the attack of Alauddin Khalji on Chittor as an allegory to expound Sufi ideas on the relationship of the soul with God, along with Hindu ideas about maya.

        Medieval Hindi in the Braj form, that is, the dialect spoken in the neighborhood of Agra, was also patronized by the Mughal emperor and Hindu rulers. From the time of Akbar, Hindi poets began to be attached to the Mughal court. A leading Mughal noble, Abdur Rahim Khan-i-Khanan, produced a fine blend of Bhakti poetry with Persian ideas of life and human relations. Thus, the Persian and Hindi literary traditions began to influence each other. But the most influential Hindi poet was Tulsidas, who venerated Rama as both a god and a hero, and he used a dialect of Hindi spoken in the eastern parts of Uttar Pradesh. Pleading for a modified caste system based not on birth but on individual qualities, Tulsidas was essentially a humanistic poet who upheld family ideals and complete devotion to Rama as a way of salvation open to all, irrespective of caste.

        In South India, Malayalam started its literary career as a separate language in its own right. Marathi reached its peak at the hands of Eknath and Tukaram. Asserting the importance of Marathi, Eknath exclaimed: “If Sanskrit was made by God, was Prakrit born of thieves and knaves? Let these errings be of vanity alone. God is no partisan of tongues. To Him, Prakrit and Sanskrit are alike. My language, Marathi, is worthy of expressing the highest sentiments and is rich, laden with the fruits of divine knowledge.”

        This undoubtedly expresses the sentiments of all those writing in local languages. It also shows the confidence and the status acquired by these languages. Due to the writings of the Sikh Gurus, Punjabi received new life.

        MUSIC
            Another branch of cultural life in which Hindus and Muslims cooperated was music. Akbar patronized Tansen of Gwalior, who is credited with composing many new melodies (ragas). Jahangir and Shah Jahan, as well as many Mughal nobles, followed this example. There are many stories about the banning of music by the orthodox Aurangzeb. Recent research shows that Aurangzeb banished singing from his court but not the playing of musical instruments. In fact, Aurangzeb himself was an accomplished veena player. Music in all forms continued to be patronized by Aurangzeb’s queens in the harem and by princes and nobles. That is why the largest number of books on classical Indian music in Persian were written during Aurangzeb’s reign. However, some of the most important developments in the field of music took place later in the eighteenth century during the reign of Muhammad Shah (1719–1748), who was a great patron of music and musicians.

    Religious Ideas, Beliefs, and Problems of Integration
        The Bhakti Movement continued to flourish during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Among the new movements was the Sikh movement in Punjab and what is called Maharashtra Dharma in Maharashtra. The Sikh movement originated with the preachings of Guru Nanak, but its development is closely linked with the institution of Guruship. The first four gurus continued the tradition of quiet meditation and scholarship. The fifth guru, Guru Arjan, completed the compilation of the Sikh scriptures called the Adi Granth or Granth Sahib. To emphasize that the guru combined both spiritual and worldly leadership, Guru Arjan began to live in an aristocratic style. He erected lofty buildings in Amritsar, wore fine clothes, procured fine horses from Central Asia, and maintained retainers in attendance. He also introduced a system of collecting offerings from the Sikhs at the rate of one-tenth of their income to promote the movement.

        Akbar had been deeply impressed with the Sikh gurus and is said to have visited them at Amritsar. However, a conflict arose when Guru Arjan was imprisoned and executed by Jahangir on the charge of aiding the rebel prince Khusrau with money and prayers. His successor, Guru Hargobind, was also imprisoned for a time but was soon released and developed good relations with Jahangir, even accompanying him on his journey to Kashmir before the emperor’s death. Guru Hargobind later clashed with Shah Jahan over a hunting incident. While the emperor was hunting near Amritsar, one of his favorite hawks flew into the guru’s camp, and his refusal to return it led to a series of skirmishes. However, the matter was settled through court intervention.

        A second conflict arose when the guru’s attempt to build a new city on the river Beas near Jalandhar was objected to. A third conflict occurred when two horses of exceptional beauty and speed, being brought to the guru from Central Asia, were seized by royal officials. A follower of the guru, Bidhi Chand, stole these horses and presented them to the guru. By this time, the guru had a significant following, and in a series of battles, he proved himself a capable leader. The guru was supported for some time by a Pathan, Painda Khan. Ultimately, Guru Hargobind retired to the Punjab foothills and was left undisturbed.

        According to the historian R. S. Tripathi, these conflicts were of an “inconsequential nature” and were driven more by personal and political factors than religious differences. The guru’s assumption of a rich lifestyle and the title Sachcha Padshah or “True Sovereign” did not seem to trouble the Mughal rulers, as similar practices were observed among some Sufi saints who were also given grand titles by their followers to emphasize their spiritual eminence.

        There was no atmosphere of confrontation between the Sikhs and the Mughal rulers during this period. Nor was there any systematic persecution of Hindus, and hence, no occasion for the Sikhs or any sect to emerge as the champions of Hindus against religious oppression. Despite Shah Jahan displaying orthodoxy at the beginning of his reign and engaging in a few acts of intolerance, such as demolishing newly built temples, he was not rigid in his outlook. His policies became more tempered towards the end of his reign under the influence of his liberal son, Dara Shikoh. Dara, the eldest son of Shah Jahan, was a scholar and Sufi who enjoyed discussing religious matters with learned men. With the help of Brahmans from Kashi, he translated the Bhagavad Gita into Persian. However, his most significant work was an anthology of the Vedas, in the introduction to which he declared them to be “heavenly books in point of time” and “in conformity with the Holy Quran.” Through this, he emphasized the idea that there were no fundamental differences between Hinduism and Islam.

        Another saint, Dadu, who was born in Gujarat but lived mostly in Rajasthan, preached a non-sectarian path (Nirpaksha). He refused to identify himself with either Hindus or Muslims or adhere to the revealed scriptures of either religion, asserting the indivisibility of Brahma or the Supreme Reality.

        A similar trend of religious tolerance was evident in the life and works of Tukaram, the supreme exponent of Bhakti in Maharashtra. He lived in Pandharpur, which had become the center of Maharashtra Dharma and the worship of Vithoba, a form of Vishnu. Tukaram, who claimed to have been born a Shudra, personally performed puja to the deity.

        It was not expected that such ideas and practices would be easily accepted by orthodox elements of both Hinduism and Islam, as they would have had to relinquish their entrenched positions of power and influence. The sentiments of orthodox Hindus were echoed by Raghunandan of Navadwipa (Nadia) in Bengal, who was considered the most influential writer on Dharmashastras during the medieval period. Raghunandan asserted the privileges of Brahmins, stating that only Brahmins had the right to read scriptures and preach. He further declared that in the Kali Yuga, there were only two varnas: Brahmins and Shudras, as true Kshatriyas had long disappeared, and the Vaishyas and others had lost their caste status due to the neglect of their prescribed duties. Ramdas of Maharashtra, who later became the spiritual guru of Shivaji and promoted a philosophy of activism, also strongly asserted Brahminical privileges.

        Among Muslims, while the trend of Sufism and religious harmony continued, a small group of orthodox ulama opposed it, along with Akbar’s liberal policies. The most renowned figure in the Muslim orthodox and revivalist movement was Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindi. A follower of the orthodox Naqshbandi school of Sufis, which had been introduced in India during Akbar’s reign, Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindi opposed the concept of pantheistic mysticism (Wahdat al-Wujud or unity of God and the created being), denouncing it as un-Islamic. He also opposed all practices and beliefs that he believed stemmed from Hindu influence, such as the use of music in religious gatherings (sama), excessive meditation, and visiting the tombs of saints. To assert the Islamic character of the state, he demanded the reimposition of jizya, a stricter stance against Hindus, and minimal association between Muslims and Hindus. To promote his agenda, he established centers and wrote letters to the emperor and nobles in an attempt to gain their support.

        However, Shaikh Ahmad’s ideas had little impact. Jahangir imprisoned him for claiming a status beyond that of the Prophet and only released him after his retraction. Aurangzeb, too, paid little attention to his successors.

        Thus, the influence of orthodox thinkers and preachers remained limited, confined to narrow circles. Their chief hope lay in gaining the support of those in power and wealth, while the liberal thinkers sought to appeal to the broader masses.

        The recurrent cycles of liberalism and orthodoxy in Indian history must be understood within the context of Indian society. One aspect of this struggle was between entrenched privilege and power on one hand and the egalitarian and humanistic aspirations of the people on the other.

        The influence of narrow, orthodox elements and their attempts to reassert rigid beliefs posed a barrier to growing reconciliation and tolerance between the followers of Hinduism and Islam. This struggle for religious and cultural integration reached a climax during Aurangzeb’s reign. However, the broad, liberal religious policies of Akbar were revived in the eighteenth century and became the norm once again.


- Climax and Disintegration of the Mughal Empire—I

    Problems of Succession
        The last years of Shah Jahan’s reign were clouded by a bitter war of succession among his sons. There was no clear tradition of succession among the Muslims or the Timurids. The right of nomination by the ruler had been accepted by some Muslim political thinkers, but it could not be asserted. The Timurid tradition of partitioning had not been successful either and was never applied in India.

        Hindu traditions were also not very clear in the matter of succession. According to Tulsidas, a contemporary of Akbar, a ruler had the right to give the gaddi to any one of his sons. However, there were many cases among the Rajputs where such a nomination was not accepted by the other brothers. For instance, Sanga had to wage a bitter struggle with his brothers before he could assert his claim to the throne.

        Towards the end of 1657, Shah Jahan fell ill in Delhi, and for some time, his life was despaired of. However, he gradually recovered under the loving care of Dara. Meanwhile, all kinds of rumors spread. It was said that Shah Jahan had already died and that Dara was concealing the truth to serve his own purposes. After some time, Shah Jahan slowly made his way by boat to Agra. Meanwhile, the princes—Shuja in Bengal, Murad in Gujarat, and Aurangzeb in the Deccan—had either been persuaded that these rumors were true or pretended to believe them and began making preparations for the inevitable war of succession.

        Anxious to avert a conflict between his sons, which could spell ruin for the empire, and anticipating his own end, Shah Jahan decided to nominate his eldest son, Dara, as his successor (tvadi-ahd). He raised Dara’s mansab from 40,000 zat to the unprecedented rank of 60,000. Dara was given a chair next to the throne, and all nobles were instructed to obey him as their future sovereign. However, instead of ensuring a smooth succession, as Shah Jahan had hoped, these actions convinced the other princes of Shah Jahan’s partiality toward Dara. This strengthened their resolve to make a bid for the throne.

        It is not necessary to follow in detail the events leading to the ultimate triumph of Aurangzeb. There were many reasons for Aurangzeb’s success. Divided counsel and underestimation of his opponents by Dara were two major factors responsible for his defeat. Upon hearing of the military preparations of his sons and their decision to march on the capital, Shah Jahan sent an army to the east led by Dara’s son, Sulaiman Shikoh, aided by Mirza Raja Jai Singh, to deal with Shuja, who had crowned himself. Another army was sent to Malwa under Raja Jaswant Singh, the ruler of Jodhpur. Upon arriving in Malwa, Jaswant found himself facing the combined forces of Aurangzeb and Murad. The two princes were intent on battle and invited Jaswant to stand aside. Jaswant could have retreated, but considering it a matter of dishonor, he decided to stand and fight, though the odds were against him. The victory of Aurangzeb at Dharmat (15 April 1658) emboldened his supporters and raised his prestige while discouraging Dara and his allies.

        Meanwhile, Dara made a serious mistake. Overconfident in his position, he had assigned some of his best troops to the eastern campaign. Thus, he weakened the defense of Agra. Led by Sulaiman Shikoh, the army moved east and performed well. It surprised and defeated Shuja near Banaras (February 1658) and then pursued him into Bihar—as if the issue at Agra had already been decided. After the defeat at Dharmat, urgent messages were sent to these forces to hurry back to Agra. After hastily concluding a treaty (7 May 1658), Sulaiman Shikoh started his march to Agra from his camp near Monghyr in eastern Bihar. However, it was unlikely that he would reach Agra in time to confront Aurangzeb.

        After Dharmat, Dara desperately sought allies. He sent repeated letters to Jaswant Singh, who had retired to Jodhpur. The Rana of Udaipur was also approached. Jaswant Singh moved out slowly to Pushkar near Ajmer. After raising an army with money provided by Dara, he waited for the Rana to join him. However, the Rana had already been won over by Aurangzeb with promises of a rank of 7,000 and the return of territories seized by Shah Jahan and Dara in 1654 over a dispute regarding the fortification of Chittor. Aurangzeb also assured the Rana of religious freedom and favors equal to those given to Rana Sanga. Thus, Dara failed to win over even the important Rajput rajas to his side.

        The Battle of Samugarh (29 May 1658) was essentially a contest of generalship, with both sides being almost evenly matched (about 50,000 to 60,000 troops each). In this field, Dara was no match for Aurangzeb. The Hada Rajputs and the Saiyids of Barha, upon whom Dara heavily depended, could not compensate for the weaknesses of the hastily recruited army. Aurangzeb’s troops were battle-hardened and well-led.

        Aurangzeb had always pretended that his only reason for coming to Agra was to see his ailing father and free him from the control of the “heretical” Dara. However, the war between Aurangzeb and Dara was not a contest between religious orthodoxy and liberalism. Both Muslim and Hindu nobles were divided in their support for the two rivals. The attitude of the nobles depended on their personal interests and affiliations with individual princes.

        After Dara’s defeat and flight, Shah Jahan was besieged in the Agra Fort. Aurangzeb forced Shah Jahan to surrender by cutting off the fort’s water supply. Shah Jahan was confined to the female apartments in the fort and strictly supervised, though he was not mistreated. He lived there for eight years, lovingly cared for by his favorite daughter, Jahanara, who voluntarily chose to stay with him. She re-entered public life after Shah Jahan’s death and was highly honored by Aurangzeb, who restored her to the position of the first lady of the realm and increased her annual pension from twelve lakh rupees to seventeen lakhs.

        According to the terms of Aurangzeb’s agreement with Murad, the kingdom was to be divided between them. However, Aurangzeb had no intention of sharing power. He treacherously imprisoned Murad and sent him to the Gwalior jail, where he was killed two years later.

        After losing the battle at Samugarh, Dara fled to Lahore, hoping to retain control of the surrounding areas. However, Aurangzeb soon arrived with a strong army. Dara lost courage, abandoned Lahore without a fight, and fled to Sindh, thereby sealing his fate. Although the civil war dragged on for more than two years, its outcome was never in doubt. Dara’s move from Sindh into Gujarat, then to Ajmer on an invitation from Jaswant Singh, and the latter’s subsequent betrayal are well-known. The Battle of Deorai near Ajmer (March 1659) was the last major battle Dara fought against Aurangzeb. Dara could have escaped to Iran, but he chose to try his luck again in Afghanistan. On the way, in the Bolan Pass, a treacherous Afghan chief captured him and handed him over to Aurangzeb. A panel of jurists ruled that Dara could not be allowed to live “to protect the faith and holy law and for reasons of state.” This illustrates how Aurangzeb used religion as a cover for his political ambitions. Two years later, Dara’s son, Sulaiman Shikoh, who had sought refuge with the ruler of Garhwal, was handed over to Aurangzeb under the threat of invasion. He met the same fate as his father.

        Earlier, Aurangzeb had defeated Shuja at Khajwah near Allahabad (December 1658). Further campaigning against him was entrusted to Mir Jumla, who steadily exerted pressure until Shuja was hounded out of India into Arakan (April 1660). Soon afterward, he and his family met a dishonorable death at the hands of the Arakanese on a charge of fomenting rebellion.

        The civil war, which kept the empire distracted for more than two years, showed that neither nomination by the ruler nor plans for the division of the empire were likely to be accepted by the contenders for the throne. Military force became the only arbiter for succession, and the civil wars became steadily more destructive. After being seated securely on the throne, Aurangzeb tried to mitigate, to some extent, the effects of the harsh Mughal custom of war unto death between brothers. At the instance of Jahanara Begum, Siphir Shikoh, son of Dara, was released from prison in 1673, given a mansab, and married to a daughter of Aurangzeb. Murad’s son, Izzat Bakhsh, was also released, given a mansab, and married to another daughter of Aurangzeb. Earlier, in 1669, Dara’s daughter, Jani Begum, who had been looked after by Jahanara as her own daughter, was married to Aurangzeb’s third son, Muhammad Azam. There were many other marriages between Aurangzeb’s family and the children and grandchildren of his defeated brothers. Thus, in the third generation, the families of Aurangzeb and his defeated brothers became one.

    Aurangzeb's Reign—His Religious Policy
        Aurangzeb ruled for almost 50 years. During his long reign, the Mughal Empire reached its territorial climax. At its height, it stretched from Kashmir in the north to Jinji in the south, and from the Hindukush in the west to Chittagong in the east. Aurangzeb proved to be a hardworking ruler and never spared himself or his subordinates in the tasks of government. His letters show the close attention he paid to all affairs of the state. He was a strict disciplinarian who did not spare his own sons. In 1686, he imprisoned Prince Muazzam on a charge of intriguing with the ruler of Golconda and kept him in prison for 12 long years. His other sons also had to face his wrath on various occasions. Such was the awe of Aurangzeb that even late in his life when Muazzam was the Governor of Kabul, he trembled every time he received a letter from his father, who was then in South India. Unlike his predecessors, Aurangzeb did not like ostentation. His personal life was marked by simplicity. He had the reputation of being an orthodox, God-fearing Muslim. In the course of time, he began to be regarded as a zinda pir, or 'a living saint.'

        Historians are, however, deeply divided about Aurangzeb's achievements as a ruler. According to some, he reversed Akbar's policy of religious toleration and thus undermined the loyalty of the Hindus to the empire. According to them, this, in turn, led to popular uprisings which sapped the vitality of the empire. His suspicious nature added to his problems so that, in the words of Khafi Khan, "all his enterprises were long drawn out" and ended in failure. Another set of historians thinks that Aurangzeb has been unjustly maligned, that the Hindus had become disloyal due to the laxity of Aurangzeb's predecessors, so that Aurangzeb had no option but to adopt harsh methods and to try to rally the Muslims, on whose support, in the long run, the empire had to rest.

        A new trend has, however, emerged, as shown in the research work on Aurangzeb. In these works, efforts have been made to assess Aurangzeb's political and religious policies in the context of social, economic, and institutional developments. There is little doubt about his being orthodox in his beliefs. He was not interested in philosophical debates or in mysticism, though he did occasionally visit Sufi saints for their blessings, and did not debar his sons from dabbling in Sufism. While taking his stand on the Hanafi school of Muslim law, which had been traditionally followed in India, Aurangzeb did not hesitate in issuing secular decrees, called zawabit. A compendium of his decrees, and government rules and regulations, was collected in a work called Zawabit-i-Alamgiri. Theoretically, the zawabit supplemented the sharia. In practice, however, they sometimes modified the sharia, in view of the conditions obtaining in India which were not provided for in the sharia.

        Thus, apart from being an orthodox Muslim, Aurangzeb was also a ruler. He could hardly forget the political reality that the overwhelming population of India was Hindu and that they were deeply attached to their faith. Any policy which meant the complete alienation of the Hindus and of the powerful Hindu rajas and zamindars was obviously unworkable.

        In analyzing Aurangzeb's religious policy, we may take note first of what have been called moral and religious regulations. At the beginning of his reign, he forbade the Kalma from being inscribed on coins lest a coin be trampled underfoot or be defiled while passing from hand to hand. He discontinued the festival of Nauroz as it was considered a Zoroastrian practice favored by the Safavid rulers of Iran. Muhtasibs were appointed in all the provinces. These officials were asked to see that people lived their lives in accordance with the sharia. Thus, it was the business of these officials to see that wine and intoxicants such as bhang were not consumed in public places. They were also responsible for regulating houses of ill repute, gambling dens, etc., and for checking weights and measures. In other words, they were responsible for ensuring that things forbidden by the sharia and the zawabit (secular decrees) were, as far as possible, not flouted openly. In appointing muhtasibs, Aurangzeb emphasized that the state was also responsible for the moral welfare of the citizens, especially the Muslims. But these officials were instructed not to interfere in the private lives of citizens.

        Later, in the eleventh year of his reign (1669), Aurangzeb took a number of measures which have been called puritanical. They were designed to show that the emperor was opposed to all practices which were not in accordance with the sharia, or which could be considered superstitious. Some measures were of an economic and social nature. Thus, he forbade singing in the court and the official musicians were pensioned off. Instrumental music and naubat (the royal band), however, continued. Singing also continued to be patronized by the ladies in the haram, and by princes and individual nobles. It is of some interest to note, as has been mentioned before, that the largest number of Persian works on classical Indian music were written in Aurangzeb's reign, and that Aurangzeb himself was proficient in playing the veena. Thus, the jibe of Aurangzeb to the protesting musicians that they should bury the beat of music they were carrying deep under the earth so "that no echo of it may rise again" was only an angry remark.

        Aurangzeb discontinued the practice of jharokha darshan or showing himself to the public from the balcony since he considered it a superstitious practice and against Islam. Similarly, he forbade the ceremony of weighing the emperor against gold and silver and other articles on his birthdays. This practice, which was apparently started during Akbar's reign, had become widespread and had become a burden on the smaller nobles. But the weight of social opinion was too much; Aurangzeb had to permit this ceremony for his sons when they recovered from illness. He forbade astrologers to prepare almanacs. But the order was flouted by everybody, including members of the royal family.

        Many other regulations of a similar nature, some of a moral character and some to instill a sense of austerity, were issued. The throne room was to be furnished in a cheap and simple style; clerks were to use porcelain ink-stands instead of silver ones; silk clothes were frowned upon; the gold railings in the diwan-i-am were replaced by those of lapis lazuli set on gold. Even the official department of history-writing was discontinued as a measure of economy.

        To promote trade among the Muslims who depended almost exclusively on state support, Aurangzeb at first largely exempted Muslim traders from the payment of cess on the import of goods. But he soon found that the Muslim traders were abusing it, even passing off the goods of Hindu merchants as their own to cheat the state. So Aurangzeb re-imposed the cess on Muslim traders but kept it at half of what was charged from others.

        Similarly, he tried to reserve the posts of peshkars and karoris (petty revenue officials) for Muslims but soon had to modify it in the face of opposition from the nobles and lack of qualified Muslims.

        We may now turn our attention to some of the other measures of Aurangzeb, which may be called discriminatory and showed a sense of bigotry towards people professing other religions. The most important was Aurangzeb’s attitude towards temples and the levying of jizyah.

        At the outset of his reign, Aurangzeb reiterated the position of the sharia regarding temples, synagogues, churches, etc., that ‘long-standing temples should not be demolished, but no new temples allowed to be built.’ Further, old places of worship could be repaired ‘since buildings cannot last forever.’ This position is clearly spelled out in a number of extant farmans he issued to the Brahmans of Banaras, Vrindavan, etc.

        Aurangzeb’s order regarding temples was not a new one. It reaffirmed the position that had existed during the Sultanate period and had been reiterated by Shah Jahan early in his reign. In practice, it left wide latitude to the local officials regarding the interpretation of the term ‘long-standing temples.’ The private opinion and sentiment of the ruler in the matter were also bound to weigh with the officials. For example, after the rise of the liberal-minded Dara as Shah Jahan’s favorite, few temples had been demolished in pursuance of his order forbidding new temples. Aurangzeb, as governor of Gujarat, ordered a number of temples in Gujarat to be destroyed. In many cases, it meant disfiguring the images and closing down the temples. At the outset of his reign, Aurangzeb found that images in many of these temples had been restored and idol worship had resumed. Aurangzeb, therefore, ordered again in 1665 that these temples be destroyed. The famous temple of Somnath, which he ordered to be destroyed earlier in his reign, was apparently one of the temples mentioned above.

        The Banaras farman is in the National Library, Calcutta, and the Vrindavan farman is presently in a temple at Jaipur.

        It does not seem that Aurangzeb’s order regarding the ban on new temples led to a large-scale destruction of temples at the outset of his reign. Later, as Aurangzeb encountered political opposition from a number of quarters, such as the Marathas, Jats, etc., he seems to have considered it legitimate to destroy even long-standing Hindu temples as a measure of punishment and as a warning. Further, he began to look upon temples as centers of spreading subversive ideas, that is, ideas that were not acceptable to the orthodox elements. Thus, he took strict action when he learned in 1669 that in some of the temples in Thatta, Multan, and especially at Banaras, both Hindus and Muslims used to come from great distances to learn from the Brahmans. Aurangzeb issued orders to the governors of all provinces to put down such practices and to destroy the temples where such practices took place. As a result of these orders, a number of temples, such as the famous temple of Vishwanath at Banaras and the temple of Keshava Rai at Mathura built by Bir Singh Deo Bundela in the reign of Jahangir, were destroyed and mosques erected in their place. The destruction of these temples had a political motive as well. Mustaid Khan, author of the Maasir-i-Alamgiri, says, with reference to the destruction of the temple of Keshava Rai at Mathura, ‘On seeing this instance of the strength of the Emperor's faith and the grandeur of his devotion to God, the proud rajas were stifled, and in amazement, they stood like images facing the wall.’

        It was in this context that many temples built in Orissa during the last ten to twelve years were also destroyed. But it does not seem that there were any orders for the general destruction of temples. Mustaid Khan, who wrote his history of Aurangzeb in the early eighteenth century and who had been closely associated with Aurangzeb, asserts that the motive of Aurangzeb’s orders was to ‘establish Islam’ and that the Emperor ordered the governors to destroy all temples and to ban the public practice of the religion of these misbelievers, that is, the Hindus. If Mustaid Khan’s version were correct, it would have meant Aurangzeb going far beyond the position of the sharia, for the sharia did not ban non-Muslims from practicing their faiths as long as they were loyal to the ruler. Nor have we found any farmans to the governors on the lines suggested by Mustaid Khan. However, the situation was different during periods of hostilities. Thus, during 1679–80, when there was a state of war with the Rathors of Marwar and the Rana of Udaipur, many temples of old standing were destroyed at Jodhpur and its parganas and at Udaipur.

        In his policy toward temples, Aurangzeb may have remained formally within the framework of the sharia, but there is little doubt that his stand in the matter was a setback to the policy of broad toleration followed by his predecessors. It led to a climate of opinion that the destruction of temples on any excuse would not only be condoned but would be welcomed by the emperor. While we do have instances of grants to Hindu temples and maths by Aurangzeb, on the whole, the atmosphere generated by Aurangzeb’s policy towards Hindu temples was bound to create disquiet among large sections of Hindus. However, it seems that Aurangzeb's zeal for the destruction of temples abated after 1679, for we do not hear of any large-scale destruction of temples in the south between 1681 and his death in 1707. But a new irritant, the jizyah or the poll tax, was introduced in the interval.

        We have already explained the background of the jizyah and its introduction in India by the Arab and Turkish rulers. According to the sharia, in a Muslim state, the payment of jizyah was obligatory (wajib) for non-Muslims. Akbar had abolished it for reasons that we have noted. However, a section of orthodox theologians had been agitating for the revival of jizyah so that the superior position of Islam, including that of the theologians, could be made manifest to all. We are told that after accession to the throne, Aurangzeb contemplated the revival of the jizyah on a number of occasions but did not do so for fear of political opposition. Ultimately, in 1679, in the twenty-second year of his reign, he finally re-imposed it. There has been considerable discussion among historians regarding Aurangzeb’s motives for the step.

        Some modern writers are of the opinion that Aurangzeb’s measures were designed to convert India from a dar-ul-harb, or a land of infidels, into dar-ul-Islam, or a land inhabited by Muslims. But this has no basis in fact. A state in which the laws of Islam prevailed and where the ruler was a Muslim was already considered dar-ul-Islam. Even when Mahadji Sindhia, the Maratha general, occupied Delhi in 1772, and the Mughal emperor became a puppet in his hands, the theologians decreed that the state remained a dar-ul-Islam since the laws of Islam were allowed to prevail and the throne was occupied by a Muslim.

        Thus, Aurangzeb’s attempt was not so much to change the nature of the state but to reassert its fundamentally Islamic character. Aurangzeb’s religious beliefs cannot be considered the basis of his political policies. While as an orthodox Muslim he was desirous of upholding the strict letter of the law, as a ruler he was keen to strengthen and expand the empire. However, his religious ideas and beliefs on the one hand and his political or public policies on the other clashed on many occasions, leading him to adopt contradictory policies that harmed the empire.

        (1 The conversion of large sections ofthe population to Islam in Kashmir had taken place apparendly during the fourteenth-fifteenth centuries, as has been noted in an earlier chapter.)

    POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS – NORTH INDIA
        During the war of succession, many local zamindars and rajas withheld revenue or started plundering neighboring areas, including Mughal territories and royal highways. After formally ascending the throne, Aurangzeb embarked on an era of strong rule. In some cases, such as the northeast and the Deccan, the imperial frontier was expanded. However, in general, Aurangzeb did not pursue a forward policy. His first attempt immediately after his succession was to reassert imperial authority and prestige. This included the recovery of areas lost during the war of succession and those to which the Mughals felt they had a legal claim. Initially, Aurangzeb was more concerned with consolidation than conquest and annexation. Thus, he sent an army to Bikaner to enforce obedience to the Mughal emperor but made no effort to annex it. However, in other cases, such as Palamau in Bihar, the ruler accused of disloyalty was dispossessed, and the bulk of his state was annexed. The rebel Bundela chief, Champat Rai, who had initially allied with Aurangzeb but later took to plundering, was relentlessly hunted down. However, Bundela lands were not annexed.

    NORTHEAST AND EAST INDIA
        As mentioned in an earlier chapter, the Ahoms had established power in the Assam Valley and were engaged in conflicts with the rulers of Kamata (Kamrup) on one side and the Afghan rulers of Bengal on the other. By the end of the fifteenth century, the kingdom of Kamata declined and was replaced by the kingdom of Kuch (Cooch Bihar), which dominated north Bengal and western Assam. The Kuch kingdom continued its conflict with the Ahoms. However, internal disputes led to the division of the kingdom in the early seventeenth century, which invited Mughal intervention in Assam at the request of the Kuch ruler. The Mughals defeated the breakaway kingdom and, with the help of Kuch forces, occupied the western Assam Valley up to the Bar Nadi in 1612. The Kuch ruler became a Mughal vassal. This brought the Mughals into direct contact with the Ahoms, who ruled eastern Assam beyond the Bar Nadi. After a prolonged war with the Ahoms, who had sheltered a prince from the defeated dynasty, a treaty was finally signed in 1638, fixing the Bar Nadi as the boundary between the two powers. As a result, Guwahati came under Mughal control.

        During Aurangzeb’s reign, a long-drawn-out war between the Mughals and the Ahoms ensued. The war began when the Ahom rulers attempted to expel the Mughals from Guwahati and its surrounding areas to consolidate their control over Assam. Mir Jumla, whom Aurangzeb had appointed as the governor of Bengal, sought to make his mark by bringing Cooch Bihar and the entire Assam region under Mughal rule. First, he attacked Cooch Bihar, which had rejected Mughal suzerainty, and annexed the entire kingdom to the Mughal Empire. He then invaded the Ahom kingdom, occupying the Ahom capital, Garhgaon, and holding it for six months. He eventually penetrated deep into the Ahom kingdom, forcing the Ahom king to sign a humiliating treaty in 1663. The treaty required the Ahom ruler to send his daughter to the Mughal harem, pay a hefty war indemnity, and provide an annual tribute of 20 elephants. As a result, the Mughal boundary was extended from the Bar Nadi to the Bharali River.

        However, Mir Jumla died soon after this apparent victory. The advantages of a forward policy in Assam remained doubtful, as the region was not wealthy and was surrounded by warlike tribes such as the Nagas in the mountains. Furthermore, the Ahom power remained unbroken, and enforcing the treaty proved beyond Mughal capabilities. In 1667, the Ahoms renewed their struggle, recovering the ceded territories and recapturing Guwahati. Earlier, the Mughals had also been expelled from Cooch Bihar. Consequently, all of Mir Jumla’s gains were quickly lost. A prolonged and sporadic war with the Ahoms followed for over a decade and a half. Raja Ram Singh, the ruler of Amber, was given command of the Mughal forces, but he lacked sufficient resources for the task. Eventually, the Mughals were forced to retreat further west, abandoning Guwahati.

        The events in Assam highlighted the limits of Mughal power in distant regions and the skill and determination of the Ahoms, who effectively used guerrilla warfare tactics. Similar strategies would later be successfully employed by other opponents of the Mughals. However, the prolonged Mughal invasion and subsequent warfare weakened the Ahom monarchy, ultimately leading to the decline and fragmentation of the Ahom empire.

        The Mughals had more success elsewhere. Shaista Khan, who succeeded Mir Jumla as the governor of Bengal after his setback at the hands of Shivaji, proved to be a capable administrator and general. He modified Mir Jumla’s aggressive policy, first securing a settlement with the ruler of Cooch Bihar. Next, he turned his attention to southern Bengal, where the Magh (Arakanese) pirates had been terrorizing the region up to Dacca from their base in Chittagong. The land up to Dacca had been depopulated, and trade and industry had suffered significant setbacks. Shaista Khan built a navy to counter the Arakanese pirates and captured the island of Sondip as a base of operations against Chittagong. He also won over the Firingis (Portuguese mercenaries) with financial inducements and other favors. The Arakanese navy near Chittagong was routed, and many of their ships were captured. In early 1666, Chittagong was stormed and captured by the Mughals. The destruction of the Arakanese navy allowed for the expansion of trade and commerce, playing a crucial role in Bengal’s economic growth. This victory also contributed to the expansion of agriculture in eastern Bengal.

        In Orissa, the rebellion of the Afghan Pathans was crushed, and Balasore was reopened to commerce.

    Peasant Revolts and Movements for Regional Independence:
        Jats, Afghans, and Sikhs
            Within the empire, Aurangzeb had to deal with several difficult political problems, such as the challenges posed by the Marathas in the Deccan, the Jats and Rajputs in North India, and the Afghans and Sikhs in the northwest. Some of these problems were not new and had also been faced by Aurangzeb’s predecessors. However, they took on a different character under Aurangzeb. The nature of these movements also varied.

            In the case of the Rajputs, it was primarily a problem of succession. For the Marathas, it was a question of local independence. The conflict with the Jats had a peasant-agrarian background. The only movement in which religion played a powerful role was the Sikh movement. Both the Jat and Sikh movements ultimately culminated in the establishment of independent regional states. The struggle of the Afghans was tribal in character, but even there, the sentiment of setting up a separate Afghan state was at work.

            Thus, economic and social factors, as well as the sentiment of regional independence—which remained strong—were major factors in shaping these movements. Religion also played an undeniable role. It has sometimes been argued that all these movements, except the Afghan one, represented a Hindu reaction against Aurangzeb’s narrow religious policies. In a country where the overwhelming majority of the population consisted of Hindus, any movement that clashed with the predominantly Muslim central government could be seen as a challenge to Islam. Likewise, the leaders of these rebel movements could use religious slogans or symbols to broaden their appeal. Hence, religion must be seen as part of societal and political movements.

        Jats and Satnamis
            The first section to come into conflict with the Mughal government was the Jats of the Agra-Delhi region, who lived on both sides of the Yamuna River. The Jats were mostly peasant cultivators, with only a few of them being zamindars. With a strong sense of brotherhood and justice, the Jats often came into conflict with the government and resorted to rebellion, taking advantage of the difficult terrain. Conflicts with the Jats had already occurred during the reigns of Jahangir and Shah Jahan over the collection of land revenue. Since the imperial road to the Deccan and western seaports passed through the Jat region, the Mughal government took these rebellions seriously and adopted stern measures.

            In 1669, the Jats of the Mathura region revolted under the leadership of a local zamindar, Gokla. The rebellion spread rapidly among the peasants of the area, prompting Aurangzeb to personally march from Delhi to quell it. Although the Jat forces had grown to 20,000, they were no match for the organized imperial army. In a fierce battle, the Jats were defeated, and Gokla was captured and executed. However, the movement was not completely crushed, and discontent continued to simmer. Meanwhile, in 1672, another armed conflict erupted between the peasants and the Mughal state at Narnaul, near Mathura. This time, the conflict involved a religious sect called the Satnamis. The Satnamis were mostly peasants, artisans, and lower-caste people, described by a contemporary writer as “goldsmiths, carpenters, sweepers, tanners, and other ignoble beings.” They did not observe distinctions of caste and rank or between Hindus and Muslims and followed a strict code of conduct. What began as a minor clash with a local official soon escalated into an open rebellion. Once again, the emperor had to personally lead a campaign to suppress it. Interestingly, local Hindu zamindars, many of whom were Rajputs, sided with the Mughals in this conflict.

            In 1685, the Jats revolted again under the leadership of Rajaram. This time, they were better organized and adopted guerrilla warfare tactics, combining them with plundering. Aurangzeb enlisted the help of Raja Bishan Singh, the Kachhwaha ruler, to suppress the uprising. Bishan Singh was appointed faujdar of Mathura, and the entire area was granted to him as a zamindari. The conflict between the Jats and Rajputs over zamindari rights further complicated the issue. Most of the primary zamindars (cultivating peasants who owned land) were Jats, while the intermediary zamindars (who collected land revenue) were Rajputs. The Jats put up strong resistance, but by 1691, Rajaram and his successor, Churaman, were compelled to submit. However, unrest among the Jat peasants persisted, and their plundering activities made the Delhi-Agra road unsafe for travelers. Later, in the eighteenth century, taking advantage of Mughal civil wars and the weakening of central authority, Churaman was able to carve out a separate Jat principality in the region, ousting the Rajput zamindars. Thus, what initially started as a peasant uprising gradually transformed into the formation of a Jat-ruled state.

        The Afghans
            Aurangzeb came into conflict with the Afghans as well. Conflict with the hardy Afghan tribesmen who lived in the mountainous region between Punjab and Kabul was not new. Akbar had to fight against the Afghans and, in the process, lost the life of his close friend and confidant, Raja Birbal. Conflict with the Afghan tribesmen also occurred during the reign of Shah Jahan. These conflicts were partly economic and partly political and religious. With little means of livelihood in the rugged mountains, the Afghans had no option but to prey on caravans or enroll in the Mughal armies. Their fierce love of freedom made service in the Mughal armies difficult. The Mughals generally kept them content by paying subsidies, but the growth of population or the rise of an ambitious leader could lead to a breach of this tacit agreement.

            During Aurangzeb’s reign, a new stirring among the Pathans took place. In 1667, Bhagu, the leader of the Yusufzai tribe, proclaimed a person named Muhammad Shah as king, who claimed descent from an ancient royal lineage, and declared himself his wazir. It appears that among the Afghans, as among the Jats, the ambition of setting up a separate state of their own had begun to rise. A religious revivalist movement called the Raushanai, which emphasized a strict ethical life and devotion to a chosen pir, had provided an intellectual and moral background to the movement.

            Gradually, Bhagu’s movement spread, and his followers began ravaging and plundering the Hazara, Attock, and Peshawar districts, bringing traffic in the Khyber Pass to a standstill. To clear the Khyber and crush the uprising, Aurangzeb deputed the chief bakhshi, Amir Khan, with a Rajput contingent. After a series of hard-fought battles, the Afghan resistance was broken. However, to keep them in check, Maharaja Jaswant Singh, the ruler of Marwar, was appointed as thanedar of Jamrud in 1671.

            There was a second Afghan uprising in 1672. This time, the leader of the opposition was the Afridi chief, Akmal Khan, who proclaimed himself king, read the khutba, and struck coins in his name. He declared war against the Mughals and summoned all the Afghans to join him. According to a contemporary writer, with a following “more numerous than ants and locusts,” they closed the Khyber Pass.

            Moving forward to clear the Pass, Amir Khan advanced too far and suffered a disastrous defeat in the narrow defile. He barely managed to escape with his life, but 10,000 men perished, and cash and goods worth two crores were looted by the Afghans. This defeat encouraged other tribesmen, including Khushhal Khan Khattak, a sworn enemy of Aurangzeb who had previously suffered imprisonment under him, to join the resistance.

            In 1674, another Mughal noble, Shujaat Khan, suffered a disastrous rout in the Khyber. However, he was rescued by a heroic band of Rathores sent by Jaswant Singh. At last, in the middle of 1674, Aurangzeb himself went to Peshawar and remained in the region until the end of 1675. Through force and diplomacy, the Afghan united front was broken, and peace was gradually restored.

            The Afghan uprising demonstrates that the sentiments of resistance to Mughal rule and the urge for regional freedom were not confined to sections of Hindus, such as the Jats and Marathas. Additionally, the Afghan uprising helped reduce Mughal pressure on Shivaji during a crucial period. It also made it difficult, if not impossible, for the Mughals to pursue an aggressive forward policy in the Deccan until 1676—by which time Shivaji had crowned himself and entered into an alliance with Bijapur and Golconda.

        The Sikhs
            Although there had been some clashes between the Sikh Gurus and the Mughals under Shah Jahan, there was no conflict between the Sikhs and Aurangzeb until 1675. In fact, conscious of the growing importance of the Sikhs, Aurangzeb had tried to engage Ram Rai, the elder son of Guru Har Rai, at the court. However, Guru Har Rai was displeased with Ram Rai and nominated his younger son, Har Kishan, as his successor, even though he was only six years old at the time. Har Kishan died soon after and was succeeded in 1664 by Guru Tegh Bahadur. Ram Rai put forward his claim to the gaddi both before the accession of Guru Har Kishan and after his death. Aurangzeb did not interfere and granted land at Dehra Dun to Ram Rai to build his gurudwara there. However, Ram Rai mostly remained in Delhi and continued to intrigue against Guru Tegh Bahadur, attempting to poison the emperor’s mind against him. After his succession, Guru Tegh Bahadur came to Delhi, but to escape Ram Rai’s machinations, he journeyed to Bihar and served with Raja Ram Singh of Amber in Assam until 1671. However, in 1675, Guru Tegh Bahadur was brought to Delhi along with five of his followers. Various accusations were made against him, and he was asked to renounce his faith, which he refused. As punishment, he was beheaded.

            Various reasons have been put forward to explain Aurangzeb’s action. According to a poetic work by Guru Gobind Singh, the son and successor of Guru Tegh Bahadur, he gave up his life in defense of the Hindu faith after meeting some Brahmins from Kashmir who sought his support. However, there are no detailed records of this meeting. Another later tradition states that the Guru was protesting against the oppression of the Mughal governor of Kashmir, Sher Afgan, and the large-scale forced conversion of Hindus. However, the Mughal governor of Kashmir until 1671 was Saif Khan, a well-known builder of bridges and a liberal administrator who even appointed a Hindu advisor. His successor, Iftikhar Khan, was known for his anti-Shia stance, but there are no historical references to his persecution of Hindus. In fact, no local Kashmiri histories, including one written by Narayan Kaul in 1710, mention such persecution.

            Another tradition suggests that Guru Tegh Bahadur was executed because his enemies and rivals, such as Ram Rai, convinced Aurangzeb to ask him to perform a miracle to prove his divine powers. When the Guru refused, action was taken against him. However, this seems unlikely, as Aurangzeb was away from Delhi from early 1675 to March 1676, dealing with the Afghan rebels. Therefore, he could not have summoned the Guru at Ram Rai’s suggestion.

            Later Persian sources, which seem to justify the official action, claim that Guru Tegh Bahadur had a large following and moved around Punjab alongside Hafiz Adam, a follower of Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindi, extorting money from villagers. These sources also state that a local waqia-navis (intelligence reporter) warned the emperor that if action was not taken against the Guru, it could lead to disturbances or even a rebellion. However, the reliability of these accounts is questionable, as Hafiz Adam had died much earlier. Additionally, some Persian sources claim the Guru was executed in Lahore rather than Delhi.

            It appears that, for Aurangzeb, the beheading of the Guru was primarily a law-and-order matter. However, another Persian source contradicts this, stating that peasants in conflict with revenue collectors, jagirdars, or zamindars often sought refuge with the Guru, who protected them. This suggests that rather than extorting money, as alleged, the Guru was emerging as a champion against injustice and oppression.

            Aurangzeb’s emphasis on sharia, his destruction of newly built temples, and even the demolition of some old temples in places like Mathura and Varanasi—as punishment for local rebellions or in response to complaints from qazis about Hindu teachings being accessible to Muslims—had created an atmosphere of heightened religious tension. In such a scenario, any conflict with a respected religious leader was bound to have larger repercussions.

            Regardless of the reasons, Aurangzeb’s execution of Guru Tegh Bahadur was unjustifiable from any perspective and demonstrated a narrow-minded approach. The event forced the Sikhs to retreat to the Punjab hills and led to the Sikh movement gradually transforming into a military brotherhood. Guru Gobind Singh played a major role in this transformation. He showed remarkable organizational ability and, in 1699, founded the Khalsa, a militarized Sikh order. Before this, Guru Gobind Singh had established his headquarters at Makhowal, or Anandpur, in the foothills of Punjab. Initially, the local Hindu hill rajas attempted to use the Guru and his followers in their internal conflicts. However, as the Guru’s power grew, clashes erupted between him and the hill rajas. The Guru generally triumphed, and the formation of the Khalsa further strengthened his position. An open breach between the Guru and the hill rajas occurred in 1704, when a coalition of rajas attacked Anandpur. Unable to defeat him, they sought Mughal intervention.

            This conflict was not primarily religious; it was partly a result of local rivalries between the Hindu hill rajas and the Sikhs and partly due to the growing strength of the Sikh movement. Aurangzeb, concerned about the Guru’s increasing power, had earlier instructed the Mughal faujdar to “admonish the Guru.” He later wrote to the governor of Lahore and the faujdar of Sirhind, Wazir Khan, urging them to support the hill rajas against Guru Gobind Singh. The Mughal forces besieged Anandpur, but the Sikhs fought bravely and repelled several attacks. Eventually, the Mughals and their allies blockaded the fort, forcing the Guru to negotiate. Allegedly, Wazir Khan offered him safe passage. However, when the Guru’s forces were crossing a swollen stream, Wazir Khan’s men suddenly attacked. Two of the Guru’s sons were captured and, upon refusing to convert to Islam, were executed in Sirhind. The Guru lost two more sons in another battle. After these tragic losses, he withdrew to Talwandi and was largely left undisturbed.

            It remains uncertain whether Wazir Khan acted on Aurangzeb’s direct orders in executing the Guru’s sons. In fact, Aurangzeb later wrote to the governor of Lahore, advising him to reconcile with Guru Gobind Singh. When the Guru wrote to Aurangzeb in the Deccan, describing the events, the emperor invited him for a meeting. In late 1706, Guru Gobind Singh set out for the Deccan, but Aurangzeb died before they could meet. Some believe the Guru had hoped to persuade Aurangzeb to restore Anandpur to him.

            Although Guru Gobind Singh could not establish a separate Sikh state during his lifetime, he laid the foundation for its future realization. His leadership demonstrated how an egalitarian religious movement could, under specific circumstances, evolve into a political and militaristic force, ultimately steering towards regional independence.

            It is doubtful whether the dastardly action of Wazir Khan against the sons of the Guru was carried out at the instance of Aurangzeb. Aurangzeb, it seems, was not keen to destroy the Guru and wrote to the governor of Lahore to “conciliate the Guru.” When the Guru wrote to Aurangzeb in the Deccan, apprising him of the events, Aurangzeb invited him to meet him. Towards the end of 1706, the Guru set out for the Deccan and was on the way when Aurangzeb died. According to some, he had hoped to persuade Aurangzeb to restore Anandpur to him.

            Although Guru Gobind Singh was not able to withstand Mughal might for long or establish a separate Sikh state, he created a tradition and also forged a weapon for its realization later on. It also showed how an egalitarian religious movement could, under certain circumstances, turn into a political and militaristic movement and subtly move towards regional independence.

        RELATIONS WITH THE RAJPUTS—BREACH WITH MARWAR AND MEWAR
            We have seen how Jahangir settled the long-drawn-out conflict with Mewar in 1613. Jahangir continued Akbar’s policy of granting favors to the leading Rajput rajas and entering into matrimonial relations with them. Shah Jahan maintained the alliance with the Rajputs. During his reign, Rajput contingents served with distinction in such far-flung areas as the Deccan, Balkh in Central Asia, and Qandhar. However, no Rajput raja was appointed governor of a province, and no further matrimonial alliances were made with the leading Rajput rajas—though Shah Jahan himself was the son of a Rathor princess.

            Perhaps, with the Rajput alliance having been consolidated, it was felt that further matrimonial ties with the leading rajas were no longer necessary. However, Shah Jahan accorded high honor to the heads of the two leading Rajput houses, Jodhpur and Amber. Raja Jaswant Singh, the ruler of Marwar, was highly favored by Shah Jahan. Both he and Jai Singh held the ranks of 7000/7000 at the time of Aurangzeb’s accession.

            Aurangzeb attached great value to the alliance with the Rajputs. He tried to secure the active support of the Maharana of Mewar and raised his mansab from 5000/5000 to 6000/6000. Although Jaswant Singh had fought against him at Dharmat, defected during the campaign against Shuja, and invited Dara to his dominions, Aurangzeb pardoned him and restored his previous mansab. He was also appointed to important commands, including the governorship of Gujarat. Jai Singh remained Aurangzeb’s close friend and confidant until his death in 1667.

            Jaswant Singh, who had been deputed to handle Afghan affairs in the northwest, died towards the end of 1678. The Maharaja had no surviving male heir, raising the question of succession to the gaddi. There was a longstanding Mughal tradition that in the case of a disputed succession, the state was brought under Mughal administration (khalisa) to ensure law and order before being handed over to the chosen successor. In 1650, when there was a succession dispute in Jaisalmer, Shah Jahan first took the state under khalisa and then sent Jaswant Singh at the head of an army to install the emperor’s chosen candidate.

            Another reason for bringing Marwar under khalisa was that the Maharaja, like many Mughal nobles, owed large sums of money to the state. Many Rajputs, whom Jaswant Singh had offended or whose territories had been granted to him in jagir, were eager to use the absence of a ruler on the gaddi of Jodhpur to create disturbances.

            Anticipating resistance from the Rathors, Aurangzeb allotted two parganas in Marwar for the maintenance of Jaswant Singh’s family and supporters. He assembled a strong army and marched to Ajmer to enforce his orders. Rani Hadi, Jaswant Singh’s chief queen, who had objected to handing over Jodhpur to the Mughals—since it was the watan (homeland) of the Rathors—had no option but to submit. A diligent search was made for any hidden treasures Jaswant Singh might have possessed, and Mughal officials were posted throughout Marwar. Large numbers of temples, including old ones, were demolished or sealed. The Mughals behaved as conquerors and treated Marwar as hostile territory.

            It is difficult to justify this action. However, Aurangzeb did not intend to retain Marwar for its strategic importance in linking Delhi with the Gujarat seaports, as suggested by modern historian Jadunath Sarkar. Two sons were born in Lahore to two of Jaswant Singh’s queens after his death. Their claim to the gaddi was strongly supported. However, before returning to Delhi, Aurangzeb decided to award the sikka (throne) of Jodhpur to Inder Singh, the grandson of Jaswant Singh’s elder brother, Amar Singh, in return for a succession fee of thirty-six lakhs of rupees.

            Perhaps Aurangzeb was influenced by the argument that Shah Jahan had committed an injustice by passing over Amar Singh in favor of his younger brother, Jaswant Singh. He may also have wanted to avoid a minority administration in Marwar. Some modern historians claim Aurangzeb offered Jodhpur to Ajit Singh, the posthumous son of Jaswant Singh, on the condition that he convert to Islam. However, contemporary sources provide no evidence of this. According to the Hukumat-ni-Bahi, a contemporary Rajasthani work, Aurangzeb offered Ajit Singh a mansab when he was presented at the court in Agra and declared that the two parganas of Sojat and Jaitaran in Marwar would continue as his jagir. Thus, Aurangzeb was effectively contemplating a division of Marwar between two branches of the family.

            The Rathor sardars, led by Durgadas, rejected this compromise, considering it against the best interests of the state. Angered by their refusal, Aurangzeb ordered that the princes and their mothers be confined in the fort of Nurgarh. Alarmed, the Rathor sardars staged a daring escape from Agra with one of the princes and crowned him Ajit Singh at Jodhpur amidst great rejoicing.

            Aurangzeb might have accepted that Inder Singh had no support among the Rathors. Instead, he set Inder Singh aside for ‘incompetence’ but refused to recognize Ajit Singh, branding him a ‘pretender.’ He summoned strong forces from across the empire and once again marched to Ajmer. The Rathor resistance was crushed, and Jodhpur was occupied. Durgadas fled with Ajit Singh to Mewar, where the Rana provided him a secret hideout.

            At this point, Mewar entered the war on Ajit Singh’s side. Rana Raj Singh, who had initially supported Aurangzeb, gradually turned against him. He had sent 5,000 troops under a trusted commander to Jodhpur to support Rani Hadi’s claim. He was opposed to Mughal interference in Rajput succession disputes and resented Mughal efforts to detach Dungarpur, Banswara, and other vassal states from Mewar. The immediate cause of his opposition, however, was Aurangzeb’s military occupation of Marwar and his rejection of Ajit Singh’s claim.

            Aurangzeb struck the first blow, attacking Mewar in November 1679. A strong Mughal detachment reached Udaipur and even raided the Rana’s camp. The Rana had retreated deep into the hills to conduct guerrilla warfare against the Mughals. The war soon reached a stalemate. The Mughals could neither penetrate the hills nor counter the Rajputs’ guerrilla tactics. The war became highly unpopular, and Aurangzeb’s admonitions had little effect on his commanders.

            At last, Prince Akbar, Aurangzeb’s eldest son, tried to exploit the situation by rebelling against his father. In alliance with the Rathor chief Durgadas, he marched on Ajmer (January 1681), where Aurangzeb was vulnerable, with his best troops engaged elsewhere. However, Prince Akbar delayed, allowing Aurangzeb to stir up dissension in his camp through false letters. Prince Akbar was forced to flee to Maharashtra, and Aurangzeb was relieved.

            The Mewar campaign now became secondary for Aurangzeb. He patched up a treaty with Rana Jagat Singh (Rana Raj Singh had since died). The new Rana was forced to surrender some parganas in lieu of jizyah and was granted a mansab of 5000 in exchange for a promise of loyalty and non-interference in Ajit Singh’s claim. Aurangzeb promised that Ajit Singh would receive a mansab and his father’s raj upon reaching adulthood.

            This agreement satisfied none of the Rajputs. The Mughals retained control over Marwar, and sporadic warfare continued until 1698 when Ajit Singh was finally recognized as Marwar’s ruler. However, the Mughals refused to relinquish control of Jodhpur, and tensions persisted until Aurangzeb’s death in 1707.

            Aurangzeb’s policy towards Marwar and Mewar was clumsy and counterproductive. It weakened the Mughal-Rajput alliance at a critical time, damaged Mughal military prestige, and highlighted Aurangzeb’s rigid, obstinate nature. Although it did not indicate a determination to subvert Hinduism—since large numbers of Marathas entered the nobility after 1679—it contributed to the strain on the empire. However, the real conflict lay in the Deccan.


- Climax and Disintegration of the Mughal Empire—II
    THE RISE OF THE MARATHAS
        We have already seen that the Marathas held important positions in the administrative and military systems of Ahmadnagar and Bijapur, and that their power and influence in governmental affairs grew as the Mughals advanced towards the Deccan. Both the Deccani sultans and the Mughals sought their support, and Malik Ambar used them extensively in his army as loose auxiliaries. Although several influential Maratha families—the Mores, the Ghatages, the Nimbalkars, etc.—exercised local authority in some areas, the Marathas did not have large, well-established states like the Rajputs. The credit for establishing such a large state goes to Shahji Bhonsale and his son, Shivaji. As we have seen, Shahji acted as a kingmaker in Ahmadnagar for some time and defied the Mughals. However, by the Treaty of 1636, Shahji yielded the territories he controlled. He joined the service of Bijapur and directed his efforts toward Karnataka. Taking advantage of unsettled conditions, Shahji attempted to establish a semi-independent principality at Bangalore, similar to how Mir Jumla, the leading noble of Golconda, sought to carve out a principality on the Coromandel coast. Several other chiefs, such as the Abyssinian chiefs (the Sidis) on the western coast, acted in a similar manner. This forms the backdrop to Shivaji’s attempt to carve out a large principality around Poona.

    EARLY CAREER OF SHIVAJI
        Shahji left the Poona jagir to his neglected senior wife, Jija Bai, and his minor son, Shivaji. Shivaji demonstrated his mettle at a young age when, at just 18, he overran several hill forts near Poona—Rajgarh, Kondana, and Torna—between 1645 and 1647. With the death of his guardian, Dadaji Kondadeo, in 1647, Shivaji became his own master, gaining full control of his father’s jagir.

        Shivaji truly began his career of conquest in 1656 when he conquered Javli from the Maratha chief Chandra Rao More. The Javli kingdom and the accumulated treasure of the Mores were significant, and Shivaji acquired them through treachery. The conquest of Javli made him the undisputed master of the Mavala region, or the highlands, and cleared his path to the Satara area and the coastal strip, the Konkan. Mavali foot soldiers became a strong component of his army. With their help, he strengthened his position by acquiring a further series of hill forts near Poona.

        The Mughal invasion of Bijapur in 1657 saved Shivaji from Aurangzeb. He then changed sides and made deep inroads into Mughal territory, seizing rich booty. When Aurangzeb reached an agreement with the new Bijapur ruler in preparation for the Mughal civil war, he pardoned Shivaji as well. However, Aurangzeb distrusted Shivaji and advised the Bijapur ruler to expel him from the Bijapuri territories he had seized. If the ruler wished to employ him, he suggested that Shivaji be stationed in Karnataka, far from the Mughal frontiers.

        With Aurangzeb preoccupied in the north, Shivaji resumed his conquests at the expense of Bijapur. He launched an offensive into the Konkan, the coastal strip between the Ghats and the sea, seizing its northern part. He also captured several other hill forts. Determined to counter him, Bijapur sent a premier noble, Afzal Khan, at the head of 10,000 troops with orders to capture Shivaji by any means necessary. Treachery was common in those days, and both Afzal Khan and Shivaji had resorted to it on several occasions. Shivaji’s forces, unused to open battle, hesitated to engage this powerful noble in direct combat. Afzal Khan invited Shivaji for a personal meeting, promising to secure his pardon from the Bijapuri court. Convinced that this was a trap, Shivaji went prepared and, in a cunning but daring manner, murdered Afzal Khan in 1659. Shivaji’s forces then routed the leaderless Bijapuri army, capturing all its goods, equipment, and artillery. Flushed with victory, the Maratha troops overran the powerful fort of Panhala and advanced into South Konkan and the Kolhapur districts, making extensive conquests.

        Shivaji’s exploits made him a legendary figure. His fame spread, and he was credited with magical powers. People from the Maratha regions flocked to join his army, and even Afghan mercenaries who had previously served Bijapur enlisted under him. Meanwhile, Aurangzeb anxiously observed the rise of Maratha power near the Mughal frontiers. He instructed the new Mughal governor of the Deccan, Shaista Khan, who was related to Aurangzeb by marriage, to invade Shivaji’s dominions.

        Initially, the war went badly for Shivaji. Shaista Khan occupied Poona in 1660 and made it his headquarters. He then dispatched detachments to wrest control of the Konkan from Shivaji. Despite harassment from Shivaji’s forces and the bravery of Maratha defenders, the Mughals secured control over North Konkan. Driven into a corner, Shivaji took a bold step. He infiltrated Shaista Khan’s camp in Poona and, under the cover of night, attacked the Khan in his harem in 1663, killing his son and one of his captains while wounding the Khan himself. This daring attack disgraced Shaista Khan, and Shivaji’s reputation soared once again. In anger, Aurangzeb transferred Shaista Khan to Bengal, refusing to grant him an audience before his departure, a customary practice at the time.

        Meanwhile, Shivaji launched another audacious move. In 1664, he attacked Surat, the premier Mughal port, looting it extensively and returning home laden with treasure.


    Treaty of Purandar and Shivaji’s Visit to Agra
        After the failure of Shaista Khan, Aurangzeb deputed Raja Jai Singh of Amber, one of his most trusted advisers, to deal with Shivaji. Full military and administrative authority was conferred upon Jai Singh so that he was not dependent on the Mughal viceroy in the Deccan and could deal directly with the emperor.

        Unlike his predecessors, Jai Singh did not underestimate the Marathas. He made careful diplomatic and military preparations, appealing to all of Shivaji’s rivals and opponents and even attempting to win over the Sultan of Bijapur to isolate Shivaji. Marching to Poona, Jai Singh decided to strike at the heart of Shivaji’s territories—Fort Purandar, where Shivaji had lodged his family and treasure. Jai Singh closely besieged Purandar (1665), beating off all Maratha attempts to relieve it. With the fall of the fort imminent and no relief likely from any quarter, Shivaji opened negotiations with Jai Singh. After intense bargaining, the following terms were agreed upon:
            1.	Out of 35 forts held by Shivaji, 23 forts, along with surrounding territory yielding a revenue of four lakh huns annually, were to be surrendered to the Mughals, while the remaining 12 forts, with an annual income of one lakh huns, were to be left under Shivaji’s control on the condition of his service and loyalty to the Mughal throne.
            2.	Territory worth four lakh huns per year in the Bijapuri Konkan, which Shivaji already controlled, was granted to him. Additionally, Bijapur territory worth five lakh huns per year in the uplands (Balaghat), which Shivaji was to conquer, was also granted to him. In return, he was to pay 40 lakh huns in installments to the Mughals.

        Shivaji requested to be excused from personal service. Instead, a mansab of 5000 was granted to his minor son, Sambhaji. However, Shivaji promised to personally join any Mughal campaign in the Deccan.

        Jai Singh cleverly created a rift between Shivaji and the ruler of Bijapur. However, the success of this scheme depended on Mughal support for Shivaji in recovering from Bijapur the land he had surrendered to the Mughals. This proved to be the fatal flaw. Aurangzeb remained suspicious of Shivaji and doubted the wisdom of a joint Mughal-Maratha attack on Bijapur. In contrast, Jai Singh had grander ambitions—he saw the alliance with Shivaji as the first step in the conquest of Bijapur and the entire Deccan. Once that was accomplished, he believed Shivaji would have no choice but to remain an ally of the Mughals, writing to Aurangzeb, “We shall hem Shivaji in like the center of a circle.”

        However, the Mughal-Maratha expedition against Bijapur failed. Shivaji, who had been deputed to capture Fort Panhala, was also unsuccessful. Seeing his grand scheme collapse, Jai Singh persuaded Shivaji to visit the emperor at Agra. He hoped that if Shivaji and Aurangzeb could reconcile, the emperor might allocate greater resources for a renewed invasion of Bijapur. But the visit proved to be a disaster. Shivaji felt insulted when he was ranked among mansabdars of 3000—a rank previously granted to his minor son. Moreover, during the emperor’s birthday celebrations, Aurangzeb did not even grant Shivaji an audience. Angered by this treatment, Shivaji stormed out and refused imperial service. Such an incident had never occurred before, and a strong faction at court urged Aurangzeb to punish Shivaji severely to uphold imperial dignity.

        Since Shivaji had come to Agra on Jai Singh’s assurance, Aurangzeb sought his advice. Jai Singh strongly advocated for leniency. However, before a decision could be made, Shivaji dramatically escaped from detention in 1666. The manner of his escape is well known and need not be repeated here. Aurangzeb always blamed himself for his carelessness in allowing Shivaji to escape. There is little doubt that Shivaji’s visit to Agra was a turning point in Mughal-Maratha relations. Though Shivaji remained inactive for two years after returning home, the visit demonstrated that, unlike Jai Singh, Aurangzeb placed little value on an alliance with Shivaji. To him, Shivaji was merely a petty zamindar (landholder). As subsequent events proved, Aurangzeb’s failure to recognize Shivaji’s importance and his refusal to forge a strong alliance with him were among the greatest political mistakes of his reign.

    FINAL BREACH WITH SHIVAJI—SHIVAJI’S ADMINISTRATION AND ACHIEVEMENTS
        Aurangzeb virtually goaded Shivaji into resuming his career of conquest by insisting upon a narrow interpretation of the Treaty of Purandar, even though, with the failure of the expedition against Bijapur, the bottom had dropped out of the treaty. Shivaji could not reconcile himself to the loss of 23 forts and territory worth four lakh hons a year to the Mughals without any compensation from Bijapur. He renewed his contest with the Mughals, sacking Surat a second time in 1670. Over the next four years, he recovered a large number of his forts, including Purandar, from the Mughals and made deep inroads into Mughal territories, especially Berar and Khandesh. The Mughal preoccupation with the Afghan uprising in the northwest helped Shivaji. He also renewed his contest with Bijapur, securing Panhala and Satara through bribes and raiding the Kanara region at leisure.

        In 1674, Shivaji formally crowned himself at Raigarh. He had come a long way from being a petty jagirdar at Poona. By now, he was the most powerful among the Maratha chiefs, and by virtue of the extent of his dominions and the size of his army, he could claim a status equal to that of the weakened Deccani sultans. The formal coronation had several purposes. It placed him on a pedestal much higher than any of the Maratha chiefs, some of whom had continued to see him as an upstart. To strengthen his social position further, Shivaji married into some of the leading old Maratha families—the Mohites, the Shirkes, etc. A formal declaration was also made by the presiding priest, Gaga Bhatta, that Shivaji was a high-class Kshatriya. Finally, as an independent ruler, it now became possible for Shivaji to enter into treaties with the Deccani sultans on a footing of equality and not as a rebel. This was also an important step in the further growth of Maratha national sentiment.

        In 1676, Shivaji undertook a bold new venture. With the active aid and support of the brothers Madanna and Akhanna at Hyderabad, he launched an expedition into the Bijapuri Karnataka. Shivaji was given a grand welcome by the Qutb Shah at his capital, and a formal agreement was reached. The Qutb Shah agreed to pay a subsidy of one lakh hons (five lakh rupees) annually to Shivaji, and a Maratha ambassador was to reside at his court. The territory and the booty gained in Karnataka were to be shared. The Qutb Shah supplied a contingent of troops and artillery to aid Shivaji and also provided money for his army’s expenses. The treaty was highly favorable to Shivaji and enabled him to capture Jinji and Vellore from Bijapuri officials and conquer much of the territories held by his half-brother, Ekoji. Although Shivaji had assumed the title of Haindava-Dharmoddharak (Protector of the Hindu Faith), he plundered the Hindu population of the area mercilessly. Returning home laden with treasure, Shivaji refused to share anything with the Qutb Shah, thus straining their relations.

        The Karnataka expedition was the last major campaign of Shivaji. The base at Jinji, built by him, later proved to be a haven of refuge for his son, Rajaram, during Aurangzeb’s all-out war on the Marathas.

        Shivaji died in 1680, shortly after his return from the Karnataka expedition. Meanwhile, he had laid the foundations of a sound administrative system. His system of administration was largely borrowed from the practices of the Deccani states. Although he designated eight ministers, sometimes called the Ashtapradhan, it was not in the nature of a council of ministers, as each minister was directly responsible to the ruler. The most important ministers were the Peshwa, who looked after finances and general administration, and the Sar-i-Naubat (Senapati), which was a post of honor generally given to one of the leading Maratha chiefs. The Majumdar was the accountant, while the Waqia Navis was responsible for intelligence, postal matters, and household affairs. The Surunavis or Chitnis assisted the king with correspondence. The Dabir was the master of ceremonies and also assisted the king in dealings with foreign powers. The Nyayadhish and Panditrao were in charge of justice and charitable grants.

        More important than the appointment of these officials was Shivaji’s organization of the army and revenue system. He preferred to give cash salaries to regular soldiers, though sometimes the chiefs received revenue grants (saranjam). Strict discipline was maintained in the army; women and dancing girls were not allowed to accompany the soldiers. The plunder taken by each soldier during campaigns was strictly accounted for. The regular army (paga), consisting of about 30,000 to 40,000 cavalry, as distinct from the loosely organized auxiliaries (silahdars), was supervised by Havaldars, who received fixed salaries. The forts were carefully supervised, with Mavali foot soldiers and gunners appointed to guard them. We are told that three men of equal rank were placed in charge of each fort to guard against treachery.

        Shivaji’s revenue system appears to have been patterned after Malik Ambar’s system. A new revenue assessment was completed by Annaji Datto in 1679. It is incorrect to think that Shivaji abolished the zamindari (deshmukhi) system or that he did not award jagirs (mokasa) to his officials. However, he strictly supervised the mirasdars, those with hereditary rights in land. Describing the situation, Sabhasad, who wrote in the eighteenth century, states that these sections paid the government only a small part of their collections. “In consequence, the mirasdars grew and strengthened themselves by building bastions, castles, and strongholds in the villages, enlisting footmen and musketeers… This class had become unruly and seized the country.” Shivaji destroyed their bastions and forced them to submit.

        Shivaji supplemented his income by levying a contribution on neighboring Mughal territories. This contribution, which amounted to one-fourth of the land revenue, came to be called chauth (one-fourth).

        Shivaji was not only an able general, a skillful tactician, and a shrewd diplomat, but he also laid the foundation of a strong state by curbing the power of the deshmukhs. His army was an effective instrument of his policies, with rapid movement being its most important feature. The army depended for its salaries to a considerable extent on plunder from neighboring areas. However, the state cannot be called merely a “war-state.” While it was regional in character, it had a definite popular base. To that extent, Shivaji was a popular king who represented the assertion of local will against Mughal encroachments.

    AURANGZEB AND THE DECCAN STATES (1658-87)
        The relations between Aurangzeb and the Deccan states can be divided into three phases.
            •	The first phase lasted until 1668, during which the main objective was to recover from Bijapur the territories of the Ahmadnagar state, which had been surrendered to it by the treaty of 1636.
            •	The second phase lasted until 1684, during which the primary threat in the Deccan was the Marathas. Efforts were made to pressure Bijapur and Golconda into aligning with the Mughals against Shivaji and later against his son, Sambhaji. During this period, the Mughals gradually encroached upon the territories of the Deccan states while simultaneously attempting to bring them under complete Mughal domination.
            •	The final phase began when Aurangzeb abandoned hopes of securing the cooperation of Bijapur and Golconda against the Marathas. Convinced that the destruction of the Marathas required the conquest of Bijapur and Golconda first, he decided to subjugate these states.

        The treaty of 1636, under which Shah Jahan had ceded one-third of the Ahmadnagar territories as a bribe to dissuade Bijapur and Golconda from supporting the Marathas—along with a promise that the Mughals would “never ever” conquer these states—was later disregarded by Shah Jahan himself. In 1657-58, both Golconda and Bijapur faced the threat of Mughal annexation. Golconda was forced to pay a hefty indemnity, while Bijapur had to surrender the Nizam Shahi territories granted to it in 1636.

        The justification for these actions was that both states had made extensive conquests in Karnataka and that the Mughals were entitled to “compensation” since these states were regarded as Mughal vassals. The argument was that their conquests had been possible only due to the Mughals’ benevolent neutrality. However, the real reason was financial: the cost of maintaining Mughal armies in the Deccan was high, and the revenues from the territories under Mughal control were insufficient to cover these expenses. For a long time, the shortfall was met through subsidies from the treasuries of Malwa and Gujarat.

        The revival of a policy of limited expansion in the Deccan had far-reaching consequences, which neither Shah Jahan nor Aurangzeb seemed to fully appreciate. It permanently destroyed trust in Mughal treaties and assurances, making a “union of hearts” against the Marathas impossible. Aurangzeb pursued this policy with great perseverance for a quarter of a century, but with little success.

        THE FIRST PHASE (1658-68)
            Upon ascending the throne, Aurangzeb faced two major challenges in the Deccan:
                1.	The rising power of Shivaji.
                2.	Persuading Bijapur to relinquish the territories it had acquired under the treaty of 1636.

            Kalyani and Bidar had been secured in 1657, while Parenda was obtained through bribery in 1660. However, Sholapur still remained under Bijapur’s control. After his accession, Aurangzeb ordered Jai Singh to punish both Shivaji and the Adil Shah of Bijapur. This directive reflected Aurangzeb’s confidence in Mughal military superiority and his underestimation of his opponents. However, Jai Singh, an astute politician, warned Aurangzeb, “It would be unwise to attack both these foes at the same time.”

            Jai Singh was the only Mughal statesman of this period who advocated an aggressive forward policy in the Deccan. He believed that the Maratha problem could not be resolved without Mughal expansion in the region—a conclusion that Aurangzeb himself reached two decades later.

            While planning his invasion of Bijapur, Jai Singh wrote to Aurangzeb, “The conquest of Bijapur is the preface to the conquest of all Deccan and Karnataka.” However, Aurangzeb hesitated to commit to this bold strategy. The possible reasons for his reluctance included:
                •	The threat posed by the ruler of Iran in the northwest.
                •	The long and arduous nature of a Deccan campaign, which would require the emperor’s personal presence.
                •	The risk of leaving a large Mughal army under the command of an ambitious noble or prince, a lesson Shah Jahan had learned to his misfortune.
                •	The constraints imposed by Shah Jahan’s continued existence, which prevented Aurangzeb from embarking on a distant military campaign.

            With limited resources at his disposal, Jai Singh’s Bijapur campaign of 1665 was bound to fail. The campaign rekindled the united front of the Deccan states against the Mughals, as the Qutb Shah of Golconda sent a large force to aid Bijapur. The Deccan states employed guerrilla tactics, luring Jai Singh towards Bijapur while devastating the countryside, thereby depriving the Mughals of supplies.

            Jai Singh’s campaign suffered from logistical shortcomings: he lacked siege artillery, and a prolonged siege was impossible. His eventual retreat proved costly, yielding neither money nor additional territory. The failure of this campaign, coupled with Aurangzeb’s criticisms, hastened Jai Singh’s death in 1667. The following year (1668), the Mughals secured the surrender of Sholapur through bribery, marking the end of the first phase of Mughal expansion in the Deccan.

        THE SECOND PHASE (1668-84)
            Between 1668 and 1676, the Mughals largely remained inactive in the Deccan. A new political dynamic emerged with the rise of Madanna and Akhanna, two talented brothers who virtually controlled the administration of Golconda from 1672 until the state’s annexation in 1687. They sought to establish a tripartite alliance between Golconda, Bijapur, and Shivaji. However, factional conflicts within Bijapur and Shivaji’s growing ambitions frequently disrupted this alliance.

            The factions at Bijapur pursued inconsistent policies, aligning either with or against the Mughals based on their immediate interests. Meanwhile, Shivaji alternated between looting Bijapur and supporting it against the Mughals. Despite his concerns over the growing Maratha power, Aurangzeb appeared determined to limit Mughal territorial expansion in the Deccan. Consequently, repeated efforts were made to install a pro-Mughal faction in Bijapur that would oppose Shivaji and remain independent of Golconda’s influence.

            In pursuit of this objective, the Mughals undertook a series of military interventions, the details of which are of little significance. The net result of these efforts was the reassertion of the united front of the three Deccan powers against the Mughals.

            A final, desperate attempt was made by Diler Khan, the Mughal viceroy, in 1679-80 to capture Bijapur. However, the Mughal forces were once again outmatched by the combined strength of the Deccan states. A significant new factor in this conflict was the emergence of the Karnataki matchlock-armed foot soldiers. Thirty thousand of these troops, sent by the Berar chief Prem Naik, played a decisive role in repelling the Mughal siege of Bijapur. Additionally, Shivaji dispatched a large force to aid Bijapur and launched raids into Mughal territories.

            As a result, Diler Khan’s campaign failed to achieve its objectives, instead exposing Mughal territories to repeated Maratha incursions. Consequently, he was recalled by Aurangzeb.

        The Third Phase (1684-87)
            Thus, the Mughals achieved little during 1676-80. When Aurangzeb reached the Deccan in 1681 in pursuit of his rebel son, Prince Akbar, he initially concentrated his forces against Sambhaji, the son and successor of Shivaji, while making renewed efforts to detach Bijapur and Golconda from their alliance with the Marathas. However, his efforts did not yield results different from the earlier ones. The Marathas were the only shield against the Mughals, and the Deccani states were not prepared to discard it.

            Aurangzeb now decided to force the issue. He called upon the Adil Shah, as a vassal, to supply provisions to the imperial army, allow Mughal forces free passage through his territory, and provide a contingent of 5,000 to 6,000 cavalry for the war against the Marathas. He also demanded the expulsion of Sharza Khan, the leading Bijapuri noble opposed to the Mughals. An open rupture was now inevitable. The Adil Shah appealed for help from both Golconda and Sambhaji, which was promptly given. However, even the combined forces of the Deccani states could not withstand the full strength of the Mughal army, particularly when it was commanded by the emperor himself. Nevertheless, it took 18 months of siege, with Aurangzeb personally present during the final stages, before Bijapur fell in 1686. This provides ample justification for the earlier failures of Jai Singh (1665) and Diler Khan (1679-80) against Bijapur.

            A campaign against Golconda was inevitable following the downfall of Bijapur. The “sins” of the Qutb Shah were too many to be pardoned. He had given supreme power to the infidels, Madanna and Akhanna, and had aided Shivaji on various occasions. His latest defiance of Aurangzeb’s warnings further sealed his fate. Earlier in 1685, despite stiff resistance, the Mughals had occupied Golconda. The emperor had agreed to pardon the Qutb Shah in return for a huge subsidy, the ceding of certain territories, and the dismissal of Madanna and Akhanna. The Qutb Shah complied, and Madanna and Akhanna were dragged into the streets and murdered in 1686. However, even this crime failed to save the Qutb Shah. The Mughals opened the siege of Golconda early in 1687, and after more than six months of campaigning, the fort fell due to treachery and bribery.

            Aurangzeb had triumphed, but he soon realized that the extinction of Bijapur and Golconda was only the beginning of his difficulties. The last and most challenging phase of his life had now begun.

    AURANGZEB, THE MARATHAS, AND THE DECCAN: THE LAST PHASE (1687-1707)
        After the downfall of Bijapur and Golconda, Aurangzeb was able to concentrate all his forces against the Marathas.

        In 1689, Sambhaji was captured at his secret hideout in Sangameshwar by a Mughal force. He was paraded before Aurangzeb and executed as a rebel and an infidel. This was undoubtedly another major political mistake on Aurangzeb’s part. He could have secured his conquests of Bijapur and Golconda by coming to terms with the Marathas. However, by executing Sambhaji, he not only threw away this opportunity but also provided the Marathas with a renewed cause. At the same time, in the absence of a single rallying point, the Maratha sardars were left free to plunder Mughal territories, disappearing at the approach of Mughal forces and regrouping later. Instead of destroying the Maratha state, Aurangzeb made Maratha resistance all-pervasive in the Deccan.

        Rajaram, Sambhaji’s younger brother, was crowned as king but had to flee when the Mughals attacked his capital. He sought refuge at Jinji on the east coast and continued the fight against the Mughals from there. Thus, Maratha resistance expanded from the western to the eastern coast.

        However, at this moment, Aurangzeb was at the height of his power, having triumphed over all his enemies. Some nobles believed that Aurangzeb should return to North India, leaving the task of mopping up the remaining Maratha forces to others. Earlier, there was an opinion—apparently supported by the heir-apparent, Shah Alam—that the administration of Karnataka should be entrusted to the vassal rulers of Bijapur and Golconda. Aurangzeb rejected all such suggestions and imprisoned Shah Alam for daring to negotiate with the Deccani rulers.

        Convinced that Maratha power had been crushed after 1690, Aurangzeb concentrated on annexing the rich and extensive Karnataka region into the empire. However, he overextended his lines of communication, making them vulnerable to Maratha attacks. As a result, he failed to establish a stable administration in Bijapur, which had become the hub of Maratha activities.

        Between 1690 and 1703, Aurangzeb stubbornly refused to negotiate with the Marathas. Rajaram was besieged at Jinji, but the siege proved to be long and drawn-out. Jinji finally fell in 1698, but Rajaram managed to escape. Maratha resistance intensified, and the Mughals suffered several serious defeats. The Marathas recaptured many of their forts, and Rajaram was able to return to Satara.

        Undeterred, Aurangzeb set out to recover all the Maratha forts. For five and a half years, from 1700 to 1705, he dragged his weary and ailing body from one siege to another. Floods, disease, and attacks by Maratha guerrilla bands took a heavy toll on the Mughal army. Weariness and disaffection steadily grew among the nobles and soldiers. Demoralization set in, and many jagirdars made secret pacts with the Marathas, agreeing to pay chauth in exchange for not being disturbed in their jagirs.

        In 1703, Aurangzeb finally opened negotiations with the Marathas. He was willing to release Shahu, the son of Sambhaji, who had been captured at Satara along with his mother. Shahu had been treated well—he had been given the title of Raja and a mansab of 2000/2000. Upon coming of age, he was married to two Maratha girls from respectable families. Aurangzeb was prepared to grant Shahu Shivaji’s swarajya and the right of sardeshmukhi over the Deccan, thus recognizing his special position. Over 70 Maratha sardars assembled to receive Shahu. However, at the last moment, Aurangzeb canceled the agreement, uncertain about the Marathas’ intentions.

        By 1706, Aurangzeb realized the futility of his efforts to capture all the Maratha forts. Slowly, he retreated to Aurangabad, while an exultant Maratha army hovered around and attacked the stragglers.

        Thus, when Aurangzeb breathed his last in Aurangabad in 1707, he left behind an empire in turmoil, where all the internal problems were coming to a head.

    DECLINE OF THE MUGHAL EMPIRE—RESPONSIBILITY OF AURANGZEB
        The Mughal Empire declined rapidly after the death of Aurangzeb. The Mughal court became a battleground for factional conflicts among nobles, and soon, ambitious provincial governors began to assert independence. Maratha incursions extended from the Deccan to the heartland of the empire, including the Gangetic plains. The empire’s weakness was exposed to the world when Nadir Shah imprisoned the Mughal emperor and looted Delhi in 1739.

        It has been suggested that Aurangzeb offered the kingdom to Shahu on the condition that he convert to Islam. However, contemporary records do not support this claim. If Aurangzeb had intended to convert Shahu, he could have done so during the 13 years of his captivity. Generally, a Hindu prince who converted to Islam lost his right to his kingdom.

        To what extent was the downfall of the Mughal Empire due to developments after Aurangzeb’s death, and to what extent was it the result of his own flawed policies? This question has been widely debated among historians. While Aurangzeb cannot be absolved of responsibility, recent trends in historical analysis consider his reign within the broader economic, social, administrative, and intellectual context of the time, as well as emerging international trends before and during his rule.

        The economic and social forces at play in medieval India are yet to be fully understood. As discussed in an earlier chapter, trade and commerce were expanding in India during the seventeenth century, and handicraft production kept pace with rising demand. This expansion was only possible if raw material production—such as cotton and indigo—also increased. Official Mughal records indicate that the area under zabti (land where revenue assessment was based on measurement) expanded, and there is some evidence that total cultivated land also grew. This growth was not only due to population increase and economic forces but also, in part, to Mughal administrative policies. Every noble, including religious grantees, was expected to take a personal interest in the expansion and improvement of cultivation, and meticulous records were maintained. Historians are often surprised at the detailed data available on ploughs, bullocks, wells, the number of cultivators, and land under cultivation.

        Despite this, trade, manufacturing, and agricultural production did not expand as rapidly as required. Several factors contributed to this stagnation. No new agricultural techniques emerged to counter declining soil fertility. The land revenue system was burdensome—under Akbar, the standard state share was one-third of the average produce (excluding the share of zamindars and local elements), but from the mid-seventeenth century, the state’s share generally rose to half, including the zamindars’ portion. The revenue burden varied by region; it was lower in infertile areas like Rajasthan and Sindh but higher in fertile regions such as Kashmir’s saffron-producing lands. However, the revenue demands were generally not so excessive as to drive peasants away from agriculture.

        Data from eastern Rajasthan suggests that new villages were continuously founded during the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries (though comparable data is lacking for earlier periods). The limited expansion of cultivation appears to have been due to social and administrative factors. With an estimated population of 125 million, surplus cultivable land was available, yet landless laborers were present in many villages. Most of them belonged to marginalized communities, such as Dalits. The dominant cultivating castes and zamindars—often from upper and middle castes—had little incentive to allow Dalits to settle new villages and acquire land ownership. Instead, they preferred to keep them as a reserve labor force for menial tasks like skinning dead animals and making leather ropes. The rural landless and poor, with small landholdings, lacked the capital and organization needed to settle new villages or reclaim wasteland independently. While the state occasionally initiated land reclamation, it had to rely on local zamindars and village headmen (mugaddams), who had vested interests in maintaining the status quo.

        As agricultural production grew slowly, the demands and expectations of the ruling classes expanded rapidly. The number of mansabdars increased from 2,069 during Jahangir’s accession in 1605 to 8,000 in 1637 under Shah Jahan, and further to 11,456 in Aurangzeb’s later years. Despite this fivefold rise in the nobility, the empire’s revenue increased only marginally. During Jahangir and Shah Jahan’s reigns, territorial expansion was minimal. Shah Jahan also introduced an “age of magnificence,” leading to extravagant court expenditures. Although some nobles engaged in trade through merchants, their primary income source remained land revenue. Rising prices in the first half of the seventeenth century led nobles to squeeze more revenue from peasants and zamindars.

        Little is known about the exact number of zamindars and their standard of living. Mughal policies towards them were contradictory—while they were seen as threats to imperial stability, they were also integrated into administration through mansabs and political offices, particularly Rajputs, Marathas, and others. However, as zamindars gained power, they resisted the excessive demands of nobles. With surplus cultivable land available, peasants—called pahis or uparis—migrated between villages in search of better conditions.

        Efforts to extract more revenue from jagirs, often through unsanctioned methods, exacerbated tensions in rural society. This led to peasant unrest, zamindar uprisings, and attempts to establish independent kingdoms. Administratively, it caused discontent among the nobility and intensified the jagirdari crisis. Many nobles found their jagirs failing to generate expected revenues, leading to difficulties in maintaining the required number of troops. The situation was particularly dire in the Deccan, where disturbances and weak noble contingents led some mansabdars to enter private agreements with Maratha leaders, offering chauth (a quarter of their income) in exchange for non-interference.

        Another problem was the shortage of jagirs. After annexing Bijapur and Golconda, Aurangzeb kept the most productive jagirs under khalisa (direct imperial administration) to finance his wars. Meanwhile, jagirs in newly conquered regions, such as Karnataka, yielded little income due to instability, making them undesirable. Corruption among clerks and officials further worsened the situation, as nobles had to pay bribes to secure favorable jagirs.

        To address the jagir shortage, Shah Jahan had reduced the required number of cavalry a mansabdar had to maintain, but the problem persisted, becoming acute under Aurangzeb. The conquest of the Deccan failed to resolve this, as Aurangzeb had to accommodate officials of former Deccan sultanates and the influential Marathas. In an attempt to conserve resources, Aurangzeb imposed a near-ban on new recruitments, causing frustration among the sons and relatives of existing nobles. Historian Khafi Khan described the situation as “one pomegranate among a hundred sick”—a reference to the intense competition for limited jagirs.

        The Mughal nobility was a key institution, attracting competent individuals from various backgrounds, both native and foreign. It operated within a system that emphasized accessibility and governance, ensuring peace and security. Some historians argue that the nobility decayed because immigration from Central Asia declined after Aurangzeb’s reign. However, by his time, most nobles were already Indian-born. The claim that India’s climate led to character decline is a racialist argument later propagated by British historians to justify colonial rule.

        It has also been suggested that the Mughal nobility lacked a national character due to its diverse ethnic and religious composition. However, nationalism in its modern sense did not exist in medieval times. Instead, a strong loyalty to the Mughal dynasty and Indo-Mughal cultural values bound the nobility together.

        The Mughal administration relied on a system of checks and balances to manage the ambitions of individual nobles. However, as Aurangzeb’s successors allowed the system to decay, factionalism grew. The worsening jagirdari crisis further weakened the administrative framework, accelerating the empire’s decline. The Mughal system was highly centralized, requiring a strong monarch to function effectively. In the absence of such leadership, wazirs attempted to fill the void but ultimately failed.

        It has been argued that by the time Aurangzeb ascended the throne, the Mughal army had become outdated due to the neglect of the infantry armed with flint guns and mobile field artillery. Such forces might have enabled Aurangzeb to deal more effectively with Maratha-held forts in the Deccan. However, such a development required larger resources and would have been resisted by the nobles, as the decline of cavalry would have affected their prestige.

        In the political field, Aurangzeb committed several serious mistakes. We have already referred to his inability to understand the true nature of the Maratha movement and his disregard for Jai Singh’s advice to befriend Shivaji. The execution of Sambhaji was another mistake, as it deprived Aurangzeb of a recognized Maratha leader with whom he could negotiate. Apparently, Aurangzeb had no desire to negotiate with the Marathas. He was convinced that after the extinction of Bijapur and Golconda, the Marathas were at his mercy and had no option but to accept his terms—a truncated swarajya (the term used by Maratha writers for the state carved out by Shivaji) and a promise of loyalty and service to the Mughal emperor. When Aurangzeb realized his mistake and opened negotiations with the Marathas, the demand for chauth and sardeshmukhi proved to be a serious obstacle. Even this was largely overcome. By 1703, an agreement had been nearly reached, but Aurangzeb could not bring himself to trust Shahu and the Maratha sardars.

        Aurangzeb failed to resolve the Maratha problem, leaving an open sore. He did grant mansabs to many Maratha sardars; in fact, they held more mansabs at the highest levels than the Rajputs ever did. Yet, the Maratha sardars were not trusted. Unlike the Rajputs, they were never given offices of trust and responsibility. As a result, the Marathas could not be integrated into the Mughal political system. Here again, a political settlement with Shivaji, Sambhaji, or Shahu might have made a significant difference.

        Aurangzeb has been criticized for failing to unite with the Deccani states against the Marathas or for conquering them, thereby making the empire “so large that it collapsed under its own weight.” A unity of hearts between Aurangzeb and the Deccani states was “a psychological impossibility” once the treaty of 1636 was abandoned, a development that occurred during Shah Jahan’s reign. After his accession, Aurangzeb refrained from pursuing a vigorous forward policy in the Deccan. In fact, he postponed the decision to conquer and annex the Deccani states for as long as possible.

        Aurangzeb’s hand was virtually forced by the growing Maratha power, the support extended to Shivaji by Madanna and Akhanna from Golconda, and his fear that Bijapur might fall under the domination of Shivaji and the Maratha-dominated Golconda. Later, by giving shelter to the rebel prince Akbar, Sambhaji directly challenged Aurangzeb, who quickly realized that the Marathas could not be dealt with without first subduing Bijapur and possibly Golconda. The attempt to extend Mughal administration over Golconda, Bijapur, and Karnataka stretched the Mughal administration to a breaking point. It also exposed Mughal lines of communication to Maratha attacks to such an extent that Mughal nobles in the region found it impossible to collect their dues from assigned jagirs and sometimes made private pacts with the Marathas, as noted earlier. This, in turn, strengthened the Marathas, led to demoralization among the nobility, and caused a setback to imperial prestige. Perhaps Aurangzeb would have been better advised to accept the suggestion put forward by his eldest son, Shah Alam, for a settlement with Bijapur and Golconda—annexing only a part of their territories and allowing them to rule over Karnataka, which was far away and difficult to manage.

        The impact of the Deccani and other wars on the Mughal Empire and Aurangzeb’s prolonged absence from northern India should not be overestimated. Despite his policy mistakes and certain personal shortcomings—such as excessive suspicion and a narrow, cold temperament—the Mughal Empire remained a powerful and vigorous military and administrative machinery. The Mughal army might have struggled against the elusive and highly mobile Maratha bands in the mountainous Deccan, and Maratha forts might have been difficult to capture and even harder to retain, but in the plains of northern India and the vast plateau extending up to Karnataka, the Mughal artillery remained dominant. Even thirty or forty years after Aurangzeb’s death, when the Mughal artillery had declined considerably in strength and efficiency, the Marathas still could not face it in open battle. Continuous anarchy, wars, and Maratha depredations may have depleted the population of the Deccan and brought trade, industry, and agriculture to a virtual standstill, but in northern India, which was the heart of the empire and of decisive economic and political importance, the Mughal administration retained much of its vigor. Trade and industry not only continued to flourish but even expanded. The administration at the district level proved remarkably resilient, and much of it survived and found its way into British administration.

        Politically, despite Aurangzeb’s military reverses and mistakes, the Mughal dynasty still retained a powerful hold on the minds and imagination of the people.

        As for the Rajputs, we have seen that the breach with Marwar was not due to an attempt by Aurangzeb to undermine the Hindus by depriving them of a recognized leader but rather to a miscalculation on his part. He sought to divide the Marwar state between two principal claimants but, in the process, alienated both—along with the ruler of Mewar, who considered Mughal interference in such matters a dangerous precedent. The breach with Mewar and the prolonged war that followed damaged the moral standing of the Mughal state. However, militarily, the fighting after 1684 was not of great consequence. It is doubtful whether the presence of more Rathor Rajputs in the Deccan between 1681 and 1706 would have significantly altered the outcome of the conflict with the Marathas. The Rajputs primarily demanded high mansabs, as before, and the restoration of their homelands. These demands were met within half a dozen years of Aurangzeb’s death, after which the Rajputs ceased to be a major issue for the Mughals. They played little active role in the subsequent disintegration of the empire and did not help arrest its decline.

        Aurangzeb’s religious policy should be understood in its social, economic, and political context. He was orthodox in his outlook and sought to remain broadly within the framework of Islamic law. However, this law had developed outside India under vastly different circumstances and could not be rigidly applied to India. His failure to respect the sentiments of his non-Muslim subjects on many occasions, his policy of destroying many long-standing temples, and the reimposition of jizya (as prescribed by Islamic law) did not help him rally the Muslims to his side or foster greater loyalty to a state based on Islamic law. On the contrary, it alienated segments of the Hindu population and strengthened those opposed to the Mughal Empire for political or other reasons. However, religion itself was not the main issue. Jizya was abolished within half a dozen years of Aurangzeb’s death, and restrictions on building new temples were eased. But these measures had no effect on the rapid decline and disintegration of the empire in the 18th century.

        Ultimately, the decline and downfall of the Mughal Empire resulted from economic, social, political, and institutional factors. The Mughal ruling class’s neglect of modern science and technology was also a significant factor. While Akbar’s measures temporarily kept the forces of disintegration in check, it was impossible for him to implement fundamental changes in the structure of society. By the time Aurangzeb ascended the throne, the socio-economic forces of disintegration were already strong. Aurangzeb lacked the foresight and statesmanship necessary to implement fundamental reforms or pursue policies that could, at least temporarily, reconcile the various competing elements.

        Thus, Aurangzeb was both a victim of circumstances and a contributor to the very circumstances that led to his downfall.


Assessment and Review
    The thousand years from the beginning of the eighth century to the end of the seventeenth century saw significant changes in the political, economic, and cultural life of the country, as well as, to a lesser extent, in its social life.

    In the field of social life, the caste system continued to dominate despite the challenge posed by Islam and the loss of political power by the Rajput rulers, who were duty-bound to protect dharma, which implied, among other things, the upholding of the four-fold division of society (varna-ashrama dharma). Although the Nath Panthis, Jogis, and the Bhakti saints vehemently criticized the caste system, they could hardly make a dent in it. Over time, a tacit agreement was reached. The criticism of the caste system by saints did not, with some notable exceptions, extend to day-to-day or secular life, while the Brahmins acquiesced in the advocacy of the path of devotion as a means of salvation for all castes, especially for the Shudras. Many women saints, such as Mira, and others such as Surdas, opened the path of Bhakti for women as well, allowing them to rise above their traditional roles of service and duty to a husband. However, the Brahmins continued to claim a privileged position for themselves, including the exclusive right to preach and educate.

    Within the framework of caste, new subgroups arose due in part to the absorption of tribal groups into Hinduism, the growth of new professional groups, and local and regional influences. At the same time, the varna status of castes rose or fell according to the economic and political power of the groups concerned. Rajputs, Marathas, and Khatris may be mentioned in this context.

    The Bhakti and Sufi saints gradually brought about a better understanding of the fundamental tenets of Hinduism and Islam, underlining the fact that they shared many similarities. This resulted in a greater spirit of mutual harmony and toleration, although forces advocating a narrow, intolerant approach remained strongly entrenched and sometimes influenced state policies. However, such occasions were, on the whole, limited.

    The Bhakti and Sufi saints also brought about important changes in the approach to religion, emphasizing true faith over formal observances. They also contributed to the growth of regional languages and literature. However, the excessive concern with religious and spiritual affairs resulted in a setback to the growth of rational sciences, particularly the cultivation of science and technology.

    On balance, the position of women worsened. The seclusion of women, or purdah, became more widespread, while Hindu women were unable to claim the right to remarriage or a share in their father’s property, which Muslim women had. In fact, these rights tended to be increasingly denied even to Muslim women.

    In the political and economic fields, the most important development was the political and administrative integration of the country, brought about by the Turks and later consolidated by the Mughals. Although the Turkish and Mughal systems of administration remained largely confined to northern India, they indirectly affected other parts of India as well. The institution of a well-minted silver-based currency, the development of roads and sarais, and the preference for city life had a direct effect on the growth of trade and handicrafts, which reached its peak during the seventeenth century. Under the Mughals, political integration was accompanied by a deliberate effort to create a unified ruling class consisting of both Muslims and Hindus. However, the ruling class remained strongly aristocratic in character, with only limited opportunities for talented individuals from lower classes. It also remained largely northern in character. Aurangzeb did attempt to induct large numbers of Marathas and Deccani nobles into the administration. While the Deccanis were integrated, the Marathas were not. Perhaps regional, religious, and social prejudices played a role in this, as unlike the Rajputs in north India, the Maratha sardars came from social sections that had never exercised political power or been a ruling class. Nor were they considered Kshatriyas.

    The Mughal nobility was organized as a bureaucracy dependent on the monarch. However, it derived its income mainly from lands cultivated by peasant proprietors. For the collection of land revenue from peasants, the nobility depended partly on its military following and partly on the strength of the zamindars, whose rights and privileges were defended and maintained by the state in return for their support. This is why many historians argue that the state in medieval India remained essentially feudal.

    A significant contribution of the Turks was the defense of the country from Mongol onslaughts during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. Later, for 200 years, the Mughals secured the northwest frontiers of India from foreign invasions. For this purpose, the defense of India was fixed on the Kabul-Ghazni line with the Hindukush mountains to the north. The politics of Central and West Asia were closely followed, and sometimes active participation was taken.

    India’s reputation as a land of spices and its position as the textile manufactory of the eastern world, including East Africa, led European nations to establish direct trade relations with India. The richness of the oriental trade further whetted the appetite of European nations and accelerated their economic and technological growth. Since they had little to offer in demand in the oriental world except for silver and gold procured from Central and South America, European traders, backed by their governments, sought entry into the internal trade of India and Asia. On several occasions, they desired to control Indian territories whose income could be used to purchase Indian goods, much like the Dutch, who had brought the East Indies (modern Indonesia) under their control. As long as the Mughal empire was strong, the European nations were not successful in this objective. However, the decline of the Mughal empire and significant political events in India during the eighteenth century, such as the invasions of Nadir Shah and later the Afghans, along with the rapid economic development of European nations, enabled them to establish their domination in India as well as in many other Asian countries.

    Scholars have attempted to explain the causes of the decline and downfall of the Mughal empire. However, the reasons why India, like many other Asian nations, could not develop as rapidly as European nations in the economic and scientific fields require further detailed study and research. The Mughal ruling classes had no traditions of connection with the sea. While the Mughal rulers recognized the importance of foreign trade and supported European trading companies for this reason, they had little understanding of the importance of naval power in a nation’s economic development.

    India’s lagging behind in naval power was part of its growing backwardness in science and technology. Even the mechanical clock, which integrated many European inventions in the field of dynamics, was not produced in India during the seventeenth century. The superiority of Europeans in artillery was freely acknowledged. Even where Indian craftsmen were able to replicate European developments—for example, in shipbuilding—little innovation was displayed. Apart from the attitude of the ruling class, the social structure, historical traditions, and outlook of various sections were significant factors. There was excessive emphasis on past learning and deference to those considered repositories of knowledge—the Brahmins and the mullahs. Akbar’s efforts to modernize the syllabus by introducing more science subjects of secular interest were defeated due to the pressure of these elements. The very skill of Indian artisans and their availability in large numbers inhibited the development and application of machine power to productive enterprises. The caste system's effect in fostering insularity and conservatism remains a subject of discussion.

    Thus, India lagged behind in science and technology, and the Mughal ruling class remained largely oblivious to these developments. Like all ruling classes on the decline, they were more concerned with immediate matters, including their own comfort, rather than the future.

    Despite this, the period saw remarkable developments. Political integration was paralleled by cultural integration. Indian society developed a largely unified culture despite differences in race, religion, and language. This was reflected in an outburst of creative activity, making the seventeenth century a second classical age. However, this integrated culture came under pressure from religious dogmatists and competing interests within the ruling classes. Yet, it survived, on the whole, until the mid-nineteenth century—a tribute to the saints, scholars, and enlightened rulers who helped build it.

    Despite this, the developments in various fields in India during the period should not be overlooked. The growth of political integration was paralleled by cultural integration. Indian society was one of the few in the world that was able to develop a more or less unified culture despite differences in race, religion, and language. This unified culture was reflected in an outburst of creative activity, making the seventeenth century a second classical age.

    In the south, the traditions of the Cholas were continued by the Vijayanagara kingdom. The Bahmani kingdom and its successor states also contributed to cultural developments in various fields. The rich cultural advancements in different regional kingdoms during the fifteenth century were, to some extent, integrated into the new cultural forms developed by the Mughals. However, this integrated culture came under pressure from religious dogmatists of both faiths, as well as from the competing and conflicting interests of various sections within the ruling classes. Nevertheless, the fact that it survived, on the whole, until the middle of the nineteenth century is a significant tribute to the saints, scholars, and enlightened rulers who helped to build it.

    The period was also marked by economic development and growth. Trade and manufacturing expanded, and there was an increase and improvement in cultivation as well. However, this growth was uneven across different regions and varied during different phases. Apart from the Ganga valley, where the Mughals spent a substantial portion of the empire’s revenue resources, the regions that developed rapidly during the seventeenth century were Gujarat, the Coromandel coast, and Bengal. Perhaps it is no coincidence that these regions have remained at the forefront of India’s economic development in the modern period, particularly in the post-independence era.

    Would India have continued to progress economically and even attained an industrial revolution of its own had the Mughal empire survived? While trade and manufacturing continued to expand during the eighteenth century despite the empire’s downfall, India remained backward compared to Europe—not only in science and technology but in other fields as well. As a result, most manufacturing remained small in scale, with hardly any machinery, and workers relied on the simplest tools. Consequently, no matter how skilled a craftsman was, his productivity and efficiency remained low. Moreover, artisans could not develop into traders and entrepreneurs as they did in the West, both due to caste restrictions and because most artisans possessed little capital. This was a reflection of the highly uneven distribution of wealth, which limited the domestic market.

    During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the putting-out (dadni) system grew, increasing production but making artisans more and more dependent on merchants, whether Indian or foreign.

    It was under these circumstances that the British were able to conquer India and turn it into a colony—no longer a manufactory of the East, but a supplier of raw materials instead. It is this ebb and flow that makes the study of history both interesting and rewarding.